The Project Gutenberg eBook, Seeing the West, by K. E. M. (Kate Ethel
Mary) Dumbell


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Seeing the West
       Suggestions for the Westbound Traveller


Author: K. E. M. (Kate Ethel Mary) Dumbell



Release Date: May 20, 2018  [eBook #57190]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEEING THE WEST***


E-text prepared by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 57190-h.htm or 57190-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57190/57190-h/57190-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57190/57190-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/seeingwestsugges00dumbuoft




SEEING THE WEST

Suggestions for the Westbound Traveller


[Illustration: The Yosemite Valley]


SEEING THE WEST

Suggestions for the Westbound Traveller

by

K. E. M. Dumbell

Frontispiece






Garden City        New York
Doubleday, Page & Company
1920

Copyright, 1920, by
Doubleday, Page & Company
All Rights Reserved, Including That of Translation into Foreign
Languages, Including the Scandinavian

Copyright, 1914, by James Pott & Company




    “I knew it would call, or soon or late, a it calls the
        whirring wings,
    It’s the olden lure, it’s the golden lure, it’s the
        lure of the timeless things.”

                                             R. W. Service.




                             AUTHOR’S NOTE

The author begs to acknowledge, with thanks, the courtesy of the
publishers and others named below for their kindness in granting her
permission to use the extracts from their publications incorporated in
this book:

The Century Company, Messrs. Barse & Hopkins, The American Forestry
Association, The U. S. Department of the Interior, The Western Guidebook
Company, Mr. George Perkins Merrill, The Western chambers of commerce,
and the various railroads.

The extracts from Mr. John Muir and Mr. J. G. Percival are published by
permission of, and by special arrangement with, Messrs. Houghton Mifflin
Company, publishers of their works.

To Mr. Robert Sterling Yard, Executive Secretary of the National Parks
Association, especial thanks are extended for his interest and
assistance and the permission to quote freely from his most valuable
book, “The Book of National Parks.”




CONTENTS

PART ONE

The Southern Rockies

  I. The Rocky Mountain National Park

 II. Colorado Springs and Pike’s Peak

III. Salt Lake City and the Zion National Park

PART TWO

The Northern Rockies

   I. The Canadian Rockies

  II. Glacier National Park and the Yellowstone National Park

PART THREE

The Northwest

  I. Alaska and Crater Lake National Park

 II. Mount Rainier National Park

III. Lake Chelan and the Columbia River Region

PART FOUR

California

  I. Northern California

 II. Central California

III. San Francisco and Environs

IV. Southern California

PART FIVE

The Southwest

  I. The Grand Canyon

 II. Historic Places in New Mexico and Arizona

Reference Books

Index




                              INTRODUCTION

To you who have travelled in our great American West this book may serve
not only as a reminder of what you saw, but also as a lure to draw you
back to the glorious regions which, perhaps, you were obliged to neglect
before. One, two, or three trips would fall far short of showing you all
your country has to offer, unless you were fortunate enough to make the
period of each visit cover many months.

The average American citizen has only a hazy knowledge of what he
possesses in his national playgrounds. The area alone is stupendous. We
have set aside, for our pleasure and amusement, nearly ELEVEN THOUSAND
SQUARE MILES of national parks.

It is your privilege to become a member of the National Parks
Association if you so wish; through this interesting channel you can
learn in detail the particular charms of each park.

If these playgrounds are ever connected by automobile highways, as we
hope they will be some day, there will be in this country a region for
sightseeing tours as the world has not yet dreamed of.

We have thought serious thoughts, and done serious things, for some time
past; now the reaction has set in and play we must and will.

In one park alone, within easy reach, close to Denver, “The Gateway to
the Rockies,” you may find 51 mountains having an altitude of more than
10,000 feet, mountain streams, mountain lakes, big game, etc., etc.,
indefinitely. Then go on to Mount Rainier National Park in Washington,
or Glacier Park in Montana, where await you sights that fairly stagger
even those who think they are familiar with mountain scenery, glaciers,
etc.

When weary of ascents, or seeking other sights, where, in what part of
the world, can you find anything to compare with the Grand Canyon of
Arizona? Here your _descent_ is one mile! No foreign picture gallery can
give you such pictures as you will get here, for it has not been given
to man to depict such things; Kipling’s “ten-league canvas with brushes
of comets’ hair” would be necessary!

Pass a night on the floor of this canyon, and choose the time of full
moon for it; you have never had such an experience, nor could you have
elsewhere. If you are fortunate enough to have unlimited time, do not
leave El Tovar until you have seen one superb storm, it will stretch
your very soul. This place draws so tremendously upon the emotions that
after it you will want—what? I can tell you what, the perfect peace of
the Yosemite Valley, for quiet, intimate beauty, ahead of any spot on
this continent. Here enter a camp and rest, and roam up and down the
valley floor at your will. Do not leave without climbing one of the
trails, or rather letting a horse or mule climb it with you on his back
At Glacier Point and you will know full well why I urge you to make the
trip.

For the student who would know more of his country, the West is an open
book, waiting only for him to turn the pages.

For the automobilist, Paradise awaits you! For the aviator, landings are
being prepared; the one which I saw at Crater Lake in the summer of 1919
will enable you to reach an extinct volcano of incomparable beauty. For
you who have never been in our wondrous West, may this book help you to
decide to spend what has been saved for your next trip there, where you
get 100 per cent. value for your money!

As my object is to give, in the shortest space possible, suggestions for
the westbound traveller, the matter is arranged in five parts.

                                                             K. E. M. D.

New London, N. H., July 1, 1920.




PART ONE

THE SOUTHERN ROCKIES




CHAPTER ONE

THE ROCKY MOUNTAIN NATIONAL PARK


DENVER

Denver, the capital of Colorado, “The Gateway To The Rockies,” is
situated on the South Platte River and is only a few miles east of the
Rocky Mountains. The city has developed tremendously along civic lines
of recent years and there are many public buildings which are well worth
visiting, but as my rule will be throughout this book to omit any
descriptions of cities, I must begin here. One can always procure maps
of our cities and information regarding them from the Civic Centres, so
here we will consider Denver as the best starting place from which to
make countless charming trips.

Boulder is 29 miles northwest of Denver; this is a fine drive; the trip
to Georgetown and the famous “Loop” is also well worth while.

If one has time for an all-day trip, “Corona” is satisfying; situated,
as it is, on the crest of the main range, it is quite a tremendous
climb; this is said to be the highest point reached by a standard-gauge
railroad in the United States. The station is decidedly crude and there
was sad disorder to pass through in 1919, but having overlooked that,
the view fully repaid one.

The drive through Bear Creek Canyon, via Lookout Mountain, is
magnificent.

There are countless trips to be made all round the city of Denver. If
one only has a few hours here the view from the top of the Equitable
Building is perhaps the most satisfactory, and the beautiful city parks
may be visited.

In a wonderful unbroken line stand the great mountains, the view
extending from Long’s Peak on the north to Pike’s Peak on the south.
Almost any of these mountains may be ascended nowadays, some parties
starting from Denver, others from Estes Park.

The Denver and Rio Grande Railway makes a delightful tour called “Around
the Circle,” a four-day trip, stopping overnight at Durango, Silverton,
and Ouray. On this trip the traveller passes through four beautiful
canyons, over three or four mountain passes, winding back and forth over
1,000 miles of the Rocky Mountains. The ticket is good for 60 days, so
that the stops may be made to suit any one.


ESTES PARK

This beautiful park lies 7,500 feet above sea level, and can be reached
in five hours from Denver by the Union Pacific Railway or automobile.

In the park are splendid hotels, where the traveller is made welcome,
and from which fine tours are made through such scenery as only our
great West can boast, mountains, valleys, lakes, and rivers; the views
include many peaks of the Rocky Mountains—Long’s, 14,270 feet; Ypsilon,
13,500 feet; Hague, 13,832 feet. Mountain climbing to the heart’s
content, hunting, fishing, and all the quieter sports may also be
enjoyed here.

The trails take us in two hours from flower-strewn meadows to glaciers.


THE ROCKY MOUNTAIN NATIONAL PARK

Leaving Estes Park, which forms the eastern gateway to the Rocky
Mountain Park, we enter one of the finest sections of this magnificent
range.

The park embraces a most interesting part of the Continental Divide. For
the mountain climber this is a veritable Paradise, for there seem to be
peaks of every size and trails leading in every direction. For those who
like the more easy method, the automobile roads are excellent. The drive
through Big Thompson Canyon is one to rejoice the heart of the most
blasé. The area of the park is 398 square miles. “There are 51 mountains
with summits more than 10,000 feet high, also unnumbered canyons, about
200 lakes, waterfalls, glaciers, native forests, and endless numbers of
beautiful wild flowers.” The richness of this park is inconceivable. One
is tempted to go into endless detailed descriptions, but it must not be.

Many weeks may be spent here making different trips every day. There is
every kind of accommodation, from the simplest camp to the most
comfortable hotel, and all of this only 70 miles from Denver.

The big game in the park is increasing all the time, Rocky Mountain
sheep, elk, deer, etc., and there are one hundred varieties of wild bird
life.

“Entry to the park by any route is dramatic. If the visitor comes the
all-motor way through Ward he picks up the range at Arapaho Peak, and
follows it closely for miles. If he comes by any of the rail routes, his
motor stage emerges from the foothills upon a sudden spectacle of
magnificence—the snowy range, its highest summit crowned with cloud,
looming upon the horizon across the peaceful plateau. By any route the
appearance of the range begins a panorama of ever-changing beauty and
inspiration, whose progress will outlive many a summer’s stay.

“Wherever one lives, however one lives, in this broad tableland, he is
under the spell of the range. The call of the mountains is ever present.
Riding, walking, motoring, fishing, golfing, sitting under the trees
with a book, continually he lifts his eyes to their calm heights.
Unconsciously he throws them the first morning glance. Instinctively he
gazes long upon their gleaming moon-lit summits before turning in at
night. In time they possess his spirit. They calm him, exalt him,
ennoble him. Unconsciously he comes to know them in all their myriad
moods. Cold and stern before sunrise, brilliant and vivid in
mid-morning, soft and restful toward evening, gorgeously coloured at
sunset, angry, at times terrifying, in storm, their fascination never
weakens, their beauty changes but does not lessen.”

New roads and wonderful trails are being built on all sides here, and
there is every variety of mountain scenery, large and small canyons with
glacial lakes; broad, rolling plains, and mountain climbing, from the
most simple to the wildest, steepest that heart could desire. Some of
the smaller trips are those leading to Fern and Odessa lakes, to Bear
Lake at the outlet of the Tyndall Gorge, to Loch Vale, Sky Pond, and the
Lake of Glass, etc., etc., until one may reach Longs Peak’s western
precipice. “These spots are each a day’s round trip from convenient
overnight hotels, which deserve all the fame which will be theirs when
the people come to know them, for as yet only a few hundreds a summer,
of Rocky Mountain’s hundred thousand guests, take the trouble to visit
them.”

Those planning to stay any length of time in this park will find “The
Book of The National Parks,”[1] from which I should like to quote a
great deal more, their best guide.




CHAPTER TWO

COLORADO SPRINGS AND PIKE’S PEAK


COLORADO SPRINGS

Colorado Springs, to the south of Denver, with its sparkling,
life-giving air, is situated upon an elevated plateau from whence may be
had a superb view of Pike’s Peak, 14,100 feet.

This peak is probably the best known of the Rocky Mountains. It lies
about six miles west of Colorado Springs. It is ascended by a cog-wheel
railway, “The Manitou and Pike’s Peak Railway,” in about one and one
half hours, or by bridle path in six hours; there is also a most
excellent automobile road, and powerful cars with good drivers make the
round trip in six hours. On the summit there is a small inn, where a
light luncheon and a cup of coffee can be had. The ascent is made during
the summer months only, there being too much snow in winter. The view is
unusually extensive, and the fascination of being in such a world of
snow is not soon forgotten.


CHEYENNE MOUNTAIN

The Cheyenne Mountain Road may well be considered one of Colorado
Springs’ most beautiful trips. Passing around the base of Cheyenne
Mountain one glorious view after another appears. The road rises pretty
steadily and grows decidedly more narrow, so narrow that only those with
steady heads can really enjoy it. This drive takes us all the way to
Seven Lakes, a distance of about 22 miles, and by continuing some five
miles farther we come to Cripple Creek. From Colorado Springs the trip
to the Cheyenne Canyons may be made. See especially the South Canyon
which can be reached by electric car. There is a small admission fee (50
cents), but it is well worth it; there are beautiful walks here. An easy
climb takes one to the rim.


THE HIGH DRIVE

Seven Falls and the South Cheyenne Canyon are reached in about an hour’s
drive from Colorado Springs or Manitou, the return trip being made
through Bear Creek Canyon and over the famous High Drive. About three
hours should be allowed for the round trip, which is very well worth
while.

On this trip may be seen the last resting place of Helen Hunt Jackson,
who, according to her own request, lies at the head of Seven Falls.

Leave your car and stand between Hercules Pillars, where miles of
massive granite walls tower above you; a more impressive, picturesque
spot is hard to find. I was distressed here, as I am in many of the
beautiful places of our country, by the thoughtless scattering of
chewing-gum papers, candy boxes, etc. Why, when we are really learning
to love the great out-of-doors, should this awful disorder continue?
Where are the Boy and Girl Scouts? Why are they not enforcing the law of
order, at least by example?


CRIPPLE CREEK

The Cripple Creek trip is made in a day, either by train or automobile.
Here one is enabled to visit one of the world’s most famous gold mines.


MANITOU

The great charm of staying in Manitou is that you are within walking
distance of so many interesting sights, then, too, you are right among
the wonderful Springs. You can have the waters fresh from the source as
many times a day as you wish. Manitou is a fascinating little town,
situated in the foothills about Pike’s Peak and just at the head of the
old Ute Pass. It is six miles from Colorado Springs, and for those who
wish quiet, may be found more attractive as a stopping place, than the
more prosperous city.


THE GARDEN OF THE GODS

The Garden of the Gods is only a short walk from Manitou, and is a most
charming place in which to pass the sunset hour; where better could one
beat this time than beneath the Cathedral Spires? This is quite the most
impressive spot in this unique garden.


THE COLORADO NATIONAL MONUMENT

“This monument, which is near Grand Junction, Colorado, is similar to
the Garden of the Gods, and is said by some to be more picturesque.

“It contains fine examples of erosion, particularly of lofty monoliths;
these latter are found in several tributary canyons, some of them of
very great size, one being more than 400 feet high.”


MOUNT MANITOU

The trip up Mount Manitou is made by incline. It would seem hardly worth
while to ascend so comparatively small a mountain so near the famous
Pike’s Peak; but this is not so; the view from the top of Manitou is
particularly pleasing, and the tramps on the top are very lovely. If I
had been obliged to miss either ascent I know now that I would rather it
had been Pike’s Peak.


THE CAVE OF THE WINDS

This cave is only a short walk from Manitou, about two miles, through
the lovely Williams Canyon, and following the Temple Drive. It is,
perhaps, rather too severe a climb for those who are not used to this
exercise, but the trip is easily made by automobile. The cave is most
unusually interesting, it is three quarters of a mile deep, and is
composed of sixteen large rooms and long, winding passages on three
levels. The stalactites and stalagmites are most fascinating in their
formation, and a brilliant electrical illumination shows off to
perfection all of this truly remarkable place. The cave alone would
repay one for the trip to Manitou.


CLIFF DWELLINGS

I went to see these dwellings the first time with rather scornful
feelings, having read and always understood that they were entirely
artificial; but I was so impressed by their natural appearance and
solidity that I made inquiries in Manitou, and was fortunate enough to
meet, and hear at first hand, the entire story of the bringing of this
dwelling from the Mesa Verde by the gentleman who moved it, brick by
brick and stone by stone. He assured me that the greatest care had been
used in resetting every atom exactly as it was found, in a cliff as
nearly like the original as possible. Hence, this dwelling may be taken
as a good example of the ancient cliff dwellings by those who are not
fortunate enough to see the original dwellings at the Mesa Verde.




CHAPTER THREE

SALT LAKE CITY AND THE ZION NATIONAL PARK


SALT LAKE CITY

The capital of the state of Utah is situated in a large valley
surrounded by mountains, chiefly the Wahsatch range. This city was
founded by the Mormons in 1847 before the “Territory of Utah” was
organized.

The Tabernacle was built in 1864-67, a large, unusual, oval-shaped
building, 250 feet long, 150 feet wide and 70 feet high; it is said to
seat 12,000 people. It is open to visitors. The Tabernacle was built in
its present form in 1893, and is reported to have cost more than
$4,000,000; this building is not open to visitors.

From Prospect Hill an excellent view of the city may be had, and a more
extensive view of the surrounding country from Ensign Peak.


THE GREAT SALT LAKE

Some 5 miles from Salt Lake City is the Great Salt Lake, 80 miles long
and 30 miles wide; it varies greatly in depth.

Beautiful mountainous islands rise out of the lake and the whole body of
water is picturesque to a degree. The tints of the water at sunset are
exquisite, and the floating spars, so often seen here, heavily encrusted
with salt crystals, add greatly to the dazzling effects of the rays of
light.

The trip across the lake by rail is one of the interesting experiences
in going to the Far West via Salt Lake City.


OGDEN AND THE OGDEN CANYON

Ogden lies 30 miles north of Salt Lake City; it is a railroad centre.
For those who may be delayed here it may be well to know that the Ogden
River Canyon is a beautiful spot. It can be reached by automobile or by
street car.


THE CANYON OF THE ARKANSAS

At Canyon City, situated at the mouth of the canyon of the Arkansas, if
you happen to have taken the “Denver and Rio Grande Scenic Railway” for
this section of your trip, you leave the Pullman car and take your seat
in a flat, uncovered observation car (during the summer months) and so
pass through this superb gorge. The next ten miles takes you through a
bit of scenery worth going anywhere to see. There is a fine piece of
engineering here. The train seems in spots to cling to the sides of the
gorge, and it is here that we cross the famous Hanging Bridge, the
waters of the Arkansas dashing madly past. Strangers who have never been
in this part of the world before may possibly be misled into thinking
they are seeing the Grand Canyon while passing through here; but this
canyon of the Arkansas must not be confounded with the canyon of the
Colorado River, which is known all over the world as “The Grand Canyon.”
It is a sad pity that the word GRAND has been used in connection with
these lesser canyons. It is a misnomer, and I know that many people have
been misled by it.


THE MESA VERDE NATIONAL PARK

Of all the ruins of prehistoric peoples in our great Southwest, these
are the largest, best preserved, and most picturesquely situated, hence
Congress has set aside as a National Park this large area of 48,966
acres under the above title.

This mesa, or high tableland, is cut by many canyons, and in these
canyon walls are found most of the cliff dwellings of this truly
remarkable region. Much has been done here to make it possible for the
traveller to reach and explore, for himself, these dwellings of the
ancients.

The best approach is from Mancos, Colorado; from here to the ruins is
only 10 miles (as the crow flies) and some 30 miles by auto road on
account of the various canyons to be traversed; a trip more full of
interest would be hard to find in any country.

The trip from Mancos to Spruce Tree Camp is made in about three hours,
and here we are taken care of for the night.

The park was established to protect the wonderful cliff dwellings of the
Mancos Canyons, which are said to be among the most important remains of
this mysterious race. There is one dwelling here in excellent
preservation, others in varying stages of demolition. The age of these
ruins is supposed to be from 500 to 1,000 years. To those who are
especially interested in this region and who desire further information,
I recommend Mr. T. H. Chapin’s “The Land of the Cliff Dwellers.”

“The principle and most accessible ruins are the Spruce Tree House,
Cliff Palace, Balcony House, and Tunnel House. Spruce Tree House is
located in the head of Spruce Tree Canyon, a branch of Navajo Canyon. It
originally contained about 130 rooms, built of dressed stone laid in
adobe mortar, with the outside tiers chinked with chips of rocks and
broken pottery.

“Cliff Palace is located about two miles east of Spruce Tree House, in a
left branch of Cliff Canyon, and consists of a group of houses with
ruins of 164 rooms, including 20 round kivas, or ceremonial rooms, and a
tapering, loopholed tower forming a crescent of about 100 yards from
horn to horn, which is reputed to be one of the most famous works of
prehistoric man in existence.

“Balcony House, a mile east of Cliff Palace, in Ruin Canyon, contains
about 25 rooms, some of which are in almost perfect condition.

“Tunnel House, about two miles south of Spruce Tree House, contains
about 20 rooms and two kivas connected by an elaborate system of
underground passages, and a burial ground of 5,000 square feet. In each
of these villages is an elaborate system of fortification, with, in some
cases, walls two to three feet thick and 20 feet high, watchtowers 30
feet high, and blockhouses pierced with small loopholes for arrows....”

I should advise any traveller planning to visit any of the Southwest
Indian Reservations to go well armed with literature. The U. S.
Government circulars, from which the above is quoted, may be had from
the Department of the Interior, and the Santa Fé Railroad provides
excellent literature.


ZION NATIONAL PARK

“With the creation of the Zion National Park in 1919 there entered into
our National Park system a reservation as remarkable, as brilliantly
beautiful, and as highly differentiated from all others as any of the
distinguished group. It contains a hundred and twenty square miles of
painted terrace country of southern Utah, surrounding from its source a
shallow river whose carved and fretted and monumented canyon lies
between sandstone walls which rise two thousand feet in gorgeous mottled
reds, surmounted by a thousand feet in marble-white.

“This Park makes two principal appeals, that to the universal delight in
extraordinary beauty of colour and form, and that to the intelligence of
the student of earth’s history.... To the best of my knowledge, there is
no place in the world where one may see so easily so much of the record
of the earth’s history.

“This canyon winding like a snake, abounding in enormous peaks and domes
and glowing like a Roman sash, is one of the most striking spectacles
which America has to offer.”[2]

The canyon is some 60 miles north of the Grand Canyon; it is reached by
rail from Salt Lake City or Los Angeles; leaving the main line at Lund,
the last 100 miles is made by auto-stage.


NATURAL BRIDGES (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

“The natural bridges for whose preservation this National Monument in
San Juan County, Utah, was created are understood to be the largest
examples of their kind, the greatest of the three having a height of 222
feet and a thickness of 65 feet at the top of the arch. The arch is 28
feet wide, the span 261 feet and the height of the span 157 feet.

“The three bridges are within a five-mile area and constitute an
imposing spectacle. In this region are two fine cavern springs as well
as other interesting and scientifically valuable natural curiosities.”


THE DINOSAUR NATIONAL MONUMENT

Just south of the Uinta Mountains and 18 miles east of the town of
Vernal, in the northeastern section of Utah, lies this area (80 acres)
which has been set aside, as a national monument, under the above title,
on account of its remarkable fossil deposits of extinct reptiles of
great size. Remains of many enormous animals, which once inhabited what
is now our southwest, have been unearthed in a state of fine
preservation. These include complete and perfect skeletons of large
Dinosaurs.

Near here may be visited the Uinta Indian Reservation.


Footnotes for Part One

    1: Robert Sterling Yard.
    2: Robert Sterling Yard.




PART TWO

THE NORTHERN ROCKIES




CHAPTER ONE

THE CANADIAN ROCKIES


In writing of the Northern Rockies we must leave our own territory long
enough to say a few words of the superb section of this great range,
which is known as the “Canadian Rockies,” where for 500 miles, east and
west, the Canadian Pacific trains pass through incomparable scenery. One
stands amazed at the feats of engineering which have been carried
through all along these lines. One great mountain after another looms up
before us, their bald heads seeming to pierce the very sky, while the
snow lies many feet deep on their sides. The Selkirks defy description!
The train glides through one wonderful pass after another.

The traveller should arrange to stop at Banff, the gateway to the
Canadian Rockies. The railroad has a fine hotel there from which may be
made many splendid excursions in the vicinity, all are easily accessible
by motor, carriage, horseback, or on donkeys. The lake, about nine miles
off, known as “Lake Minnewanka,” sixteen miles long, makes a delightful
excursion; this lake, whose waters are very deep, is walled in by
tremendous cliffs; steam launches make the round trip.

Continuing westward from here, we come, in about two hours, to Laggan,
the station for Lake Louise. Leaving the train and taking an incline car
we soon find ourselves part way up one of these splendid mountains,
where this indescribable gem, Lake Louise, suddenly bursts upon our
sight. There is hardly a finer spot than this in Switzerland; the lake,
5,645 feet above sea level, lies in a hollow at the base of three great
mountains, and at the far end, in the most dramatic setting, is the
superb Victoria Glacier, facing directly the Château Lake Louise, where
we immediately try to procure rooms looking out upon this lovely view.
As soon as you are settled, start out and walk round the lake, 3 or 4
miles. This gives you an intimate, friendly feeling which will almost
undoubtedly be succeeded by a feeling of awe as the majestic splendour
of the place grows upon you.

From here a most interesting set of mountain trips may be made by either
road or bridle path; the latter is of course the better, as one can go
farther and climb higher. I cannot go into detail, but the hotel gives
full information, provides horses, guides, etc. Do not fail to see
Mirror Lake (altitude 6,550 feet) or Lake Agnes (altitude 6,820 feet),
truly a lake in the clouds, and encircled by majestic peaks. The beauty
of this region cannot be exaggerated.

The “Valley of the Ten Peaks” is unique, and this is a trip all can
make, a 10-mile drive over good roads. I shall attempt no description of
this valley, one must see it. Leaving Lake Louise and Laggan, we pass
through Field, where another stop may be made, and various interesting
excursions taken.

Glacier, near the summit of the inexpressibly beautiful Selkirk Range,
ought not to be passed by; here again comfortable accommodations have
been arranged. Mount Sir Donald, pointed out as we pass, rises to a
height of more than a mile from the railroad.

At Sicamous there is also a temptation to stop and explore, for we are
nearing the end of the five hundred miles of the Rocky Mountains through
which we pass. Beyond Ashcroft we enter the canyon of the Thompson,
through Agassiz and Mission Junction, and about 50 miles farther on we
reach Vancouver. I attempt no description of this interesting city for
the reason given above, adequate information and local maps can always
be had in every metropolis.

A suggestion for a camping trip, to be taken from Lake Louise, has just
come to me. I insert it for those who may wish to plan such a trip.


THE TRAIL OF THE STONEY INDIAN

“Lake Louise, Alberta, is the point from which you start on this
little-used and superb trail, with saddle and pack horses and the guides
who will cook the meals, wrangle the horses, and steer you safely over
any or all difficulties, bad trails, steep cliffs, and treacherous
glaciers. You take with you all your provisions, tents, and whatever you
may need for the trip.

“Along the Bow River you wend your way, vast snow-topped mountains on
every side, and the trail winding now over steep shale slopes, with the
panorama of sparkling glaciers, rushing rivers, and deep canyons; again,
plunging into a pine forest where the ground is covered with delicate
pink twin flowers and white anemones; riding all day and sleeping out
under the blue sky where, if you are fortunate, the Northern Lights
flash in flames of red and gold. Here one wants to linger indefinitely.

“Passing Pyramid Peak, with its almost insurmountable overhanging
cliffs, Mount Murchison, calm and majestic, at last you reach the
Saskatchewan River. The horses plunge up to their withers in icy water
which rushes by foaming around the knees of the rider, but the other
side is reached in safety. Sometimes your camping ground is by an old
wigwam of the Stoney Indians, littered with grotesque, carved wooden
animals and people, made by the children, with here and there a
discarded moccasin or broken knife; again you may find an Indian
‘sweat-bath’ made of saplings bent in a half circle; the Indians cover
this framework with blankets and pour water over red-hot stones which
are placed at one end, making a regular Turkish bath. Usually, however,
the trail is unmarred by signs of man; in many places great trees have
fallen across the path and have to be cut away before you can ride on.

“Mount Athabaska and Mount Wilcox loom before you, or perhaps you turn
to the north, into the Brazeau country, where the mountain sheep roam in
great flocks. But ever you follow the sparkling rivers, now passing deep
blue-green lakes nestling among the rocks and now crossing high,
treeless passes, or barren, boulder-strewn hillsides, and always
surrounded by the mountains with their ever-changing colours, now gray
and sombre, now red, amber, and purple as they catch the glow of the
sinking sun.

“The solitude and stillness are broken only by the thunder of a distant
avalanche, or murmur of a near-by stream, the glorious scenery and the
wildness of it all catching and holding you with a fascination that
cannot be cast off.”[1]




CHAPTER TWO

GLACIER NATIONAL PARK AND THE YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK


The main features of interest to the average American traveller in this
Northern Rocky Mountain region are, of course, Glacier National Park and
the Yellowstone National Park.

Glacier Park is situated in the northwest of Montana. The reservation
comprises 915,000 acres and contains 260 lakes and 60 glaciers, varying
from five square miles to a few acres in area.

Here as in all the other great national parks of our western country,
camps have been provided, and every kind of accommodation, from this to
elaborate hotels, is to be had there.

It is quite impossible to attempt a description of all these parks
without a very long list of new adjectives, for Nature has been more
than generous in dowering this part of the world with wonderful scenery.
See lakes McDonald, St. Mary, McDuff, and Iceberg Lake; this last is
almost surrounded by great towering cliffs, many of them rising to an
elevation of 2,000 feet, in the crevices of which lie large glaciers.
Even in the short space of time which the average tourist gives this
spot, he is frequently rewarded by hearing and seeing some great
fragment break from its parent glacier and crash into the water, where,
in the form of small icebergs, they are always seen floating; hence the
name of the lake.

Blackfeet Glacier is the largest and by far the most impressive in the
park; none but hardy mountain climbers should attempt the ascent.

The park is reached by the Great Northern Railroad, from either Belton
or Glacier Park. “Stop-overs” are allowed on any transcontinental
ticket, and one, two, or three day tours will be arranged as requested.

There is a fine hotel at Glacier Park Station and from here automobile
roads lead in to the “Many-Glacier” Hotel and the chalet-like groups of
camping places.

But I do not wish to give the impression that Glacier Park is a place to
be visited en route; far from it; it is a place to go to for weeks or
months, a place for the invalid to rest in, for the student of Nature to
revel in, or for the most vigorous young people to tramp in. By far the
most attractive way to see the park is on foot and is becoming more and
more popular. Walking tours can be arranged at a very small cost, the
party either taking its own outfit, or using the chalets scattered
through the park for their benefit.

Full information on this park can be obtained from the Great Northern R.
R. or the Department of the Interior.


THE DEVIL’S TOWER (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

“The Devil’s Tower is one of the most conspicuous features in the Black
Hill region of Wyoming. It rises with extreme abruptness from the rough
Wyoming levels just back of the Black Hills. It is on the bank of the
Belle Fourche River. This extraordinary tower emerges from a rounded
forested hill of sedimentary rock which rises six hundred feet above the
plain; from the top of that the tower rises six hundred feet still
higher. It is visible for a hundred miles or more in every direction.
The visitor approaching by automobile sees it hours away, and its growth
upon the horizon as he approaches is the least of his memorable
experience....

“The Devil’s Tower can be likened to nothing but itself. It is the core
of a volcanic formation which doubtless once had a considerably larger
circumference. At its base lies an immense talus of broken columns which
the loosening frosts and the winter gales are constantly increasing; the
process has been going on for untold thousands of years, during which
the softer rock of the surrounding plains has been eroded to its present
level.”[2]


THE BITTER ROOT VALLEY, MONTANA

The Bitter Root Valley, at the foot of which Missoula lies, is one of
the rich and beautiful western valleys and is interesting historically.
Lewis and Clark traversed the valley in 1805-06 and some of their great
hardships were encountered in crossing the Bitter Root Mountains. The
point where their trail turned into the range is about 12 miles above
Missoula.

At Stevensville, about 28 miles up this valley, Father De Smet
established his first mission to the Salish, or Flathead, Indians, in
1841. The old church, St. Mary’s, still stands and is used at intervals.
The Indians were removed from here many years ago.

The valley has a great reputation for its fruits and vegetables.

At Ravalli, on the Flathead Reservation, the Government has established
a bison preserve of about 18,000 acres, with a herd of from one to two
hundred of these fine creatures. This reservation is reached by the
Northern Pacific Railroad from Arlee, Montana, and a drive of four or
five miles.

From here westward to Pend d’Oreille we follow the Clark fork of the
Columbia River. Lake Pend d’Oreille, Idaho, is one of the crystal gems
of the west; it is 55 miles long and from 2 to 15 miles wide. These
sparkling waters fill what was a deep mountain canyon. Soundings have
been made to the depth of 4,000 feet without finding bottom. Exquisitely
wooded mountains rise from the water’s edge, forming a wonderful
setting.

Lake Coeur d’Alene, the source of the Spokane River, is another lovely
spot in Idaho. Here there are some fine summer homes.

Through wild and rugged scenery we reach Spokane, and beyond cross the
beautiful Columbia River and enter the Yakima Valley, another perfection
of irrigation.


THE LEWIS AND CLARK CAVERN (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

Crossing a spur of the Rocky Mountains just west of Livingston, where
Lewis and Clark crossed in 1806, we pass through Galatin Valley, a
famous barley-raising region; here are more than 100 miles of irrigating
canals. At Bozeman the Montana State Agriculture College is located.

Near the great mining city of Butte is the Lewis and Clark Cavern,
presented to the United States, as a national monument, by the Northern
Pacific Railway. These huge, beautiful caves attract many visitors. Near
Butte are also the Pipestone Hot Springs and Boulder Hot Springs.


SPOKANE

Spokane, which used to be a trading post, is now a prosperous city.

Fort Wright, one of the military posts of the United States Government,
is on the outskirts of the city on the bank of the Spokane River.
Crossing the Cascade Range and passing down through the Green River
Canyon, we reach Seattle or Tacoma, at the extreme south of Puget Sound.


SHOSHONE CAVERN (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

On the way to the Yellowstone National Park by way of the Wyoming
entrance, at Cody, and three miles east of the great Shoshone Dam, a
limestone cave has been set apart under the above title.

The way in is rough and precipitous, and after entering the cave a
descent by rope is necessary to reach the chambers, which are of unusual
beauty and extend for more than a mile through galleries, some of which
are heavily encrusted with crystals.


THE YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK

The Yellowstone National Park is situated in the extreme northwest
corner of Wyoming, extending a few miles into Montana on the north and
into Idaho and Montana on the west. The reservation, set apart by act of
Congress in 1872, is 5,500 square miles.

From Salt Lake City or Ogden this park is reached by the Denver Rio
Grande Railway or the Union Pacific in about 12 hours, but this trip,
like so many others, can be arranged for you by whatever line you take.

The Northern Pacific Railway offers a splendidly arranged tour to and
through the park by way of Livingston, the Gate of the Mountains, and
the Upper Yellowstone River to Gardiner, the original entrance to the
park, and only five miles from Mammoth Hot Springs, the official
headquarters of the park.

The Yellowstone Park season is from June 15th to September 15th. It is
not necessary to suggest what shall be seen here, for the trips are all
arranged for one, and none should leave without making the complete
tour. This park is unlike any other; it is unique in many ways. It
contains geysers, mud volcanoes, mineral springs, and the most
gloriously coloured pools. The Yellowstone Canyon can be compared with
no other; here we have a riot of colour, said by many to rival the
colours of the Grand Canyon, really so entirely different as to make
comparison impossible. The walls of the Yellowstone Canyon are divided
by a space of many miles at the top, which narrows down to three
quarters of a mile at the base, where the foaming waters dash between
them, and here the fragments of all the lost rainbows seem to have been
collected.

There are many fine mountain peaks, the finest being Mount Washburn,
which has an elevation of 10,346 feet, named for General Washburn, the
head of the Washburn-Doane exploration party, who first climbed it in
1870. From here one gets the only view of the park as a whole. I have
never forgotten a remark which I heard John Muir make about this spot;
he said: “When you go to the Yellowstone Park do not leave it under any
consideration until you have been taken up Mount Washburn, and when you
reach the top of the mountain refuse to come down until you have passed
a night on the summit; never mind about sleep; remember that there will
come a time when you will take a long enough sleep to make up for all
you can ever lose; this will be a sublime experience.”

Words cannot tell of the impressiveness of the geysers. One may sit
comfortably on the veranda of Old Faithful Inn and watch one eruption
after another, repeated endlessly. But with every change of light, early
morning, noontide, at sunset, or by moonlight, they are seen with new
interest, and on the moonless nights the visitors are called to see some
of these great spouts with the rays of a powerful searchlight upon them.

Old Faithful, which is described as the most perfect illustration of
geyseric phenomena and whose curious fascination and real beauty cannot
be described, plays every 85 minutes to a height of 125 to 150 feet, the
eruptions lasting about five minutes.

The Giant Geyser, generally conceded to be the finest in the park,
throws its great volume of water to a height of 250 feet, playing
irregularly about three times a month and lasting about 90 minutes.

The Castle Geyser, so named for its beautifully formed crater, plays
only once every 26 or 27 hours, but lasts from 25 minutes to three
quarters of an hour. This is truly an awe-inspiring sight.

The Riverside Geyser is among the favourites. Standing on the right bank
of the Firehole River, it throws its spray into the air in a beautiful,
graceful arch across the waters of the river, playing every 7 hours and
lasting about seven minutes, and almost invariably displaying wonderful
rainbow colours.

There is a plateau a quarter of a mile in extent, covered with hot
pools, each of the most marvellously brilliant colours—reds, greens,
yellows, etc.—perhaps the most beautiful of all being the one known as
Morning-Glory Pool, so named from its curious shape resembling this
well-known flower.

This park is a famous animal preserve. Elk deer, buffalo and bear thrive
here. The bears cause great entertainment, coming down near some of the
hotels to feed upon whatever may be offered them; having been protected
so long, they have no fear.

Of all of our national parks the Yellowstone is the largest. It is also
the highest and coolest. We are told that frosts occur there every month
of the year. Mr. Muir says of it: “The air is electric and full of
ozone; healing, reviving, exhilarating, kept pure by frost and fire,
while the scenery is wild enough to awaken the dead.

“It is a glorious place to grow in and rest in. Camping on the shores of
the lakes in the warm openings of the woods, golden with sunflowers, on
the banks of the streams, by the snowy waterfalls, beside the exciting
wonders or away from them in the scallops of the mountain walls
sheltered from every wind, on smooth, silky lawns enamelled with
gentians, up in the fountain hollows of the ancient glaciers between the
peaks, where cool pools and brooks and gardens of precious plants
charmingly embowered are never wanting....

“Again and again amid the calmest, stillest scenery you will be brought
to a standstill, hushed and awe-stricken before phenomena wholly new to
you. Boiling springs and huge, deep pools of purest green and azure
water, thousands of them are splashing and heaving in these high, cool
mountains as if a fierce fire were burning beneath each one of them; and
a hundred geysers, white torrents of boiling water and steam, like
inverted waterfalls, are ever and anon rushing up out of the hot, black
underworld.

“Some of these ponderous geyser columns are as large as sequoias—5 to 60
feet in diameter, 150 to 300 feet high—and are sustained at this great
height with tremendous energy for a few minutes, or perhaps nearly an
hour, standing rigid and erect, hissing, throbbing, booming, as if
thunderstorms were raging beneath their roots.... No frost cools them,
snow never covers them ... winter and summer they welcome alike ...
faithfully rising and sinking in fairy, rhythmic dance night and day, in
all sorts of weather, at varying periods of minutes, hours, or weeks....
The largest and one of the most beautiful of the springs is the
Prismatic, which the guide will be sure to show you. With a
circumference of three hundred yards, it is more like a lake than a
spring. The water is pure deep, blue in the centre, fading to green on
the edges, and its basin and the slightly terraced pavement about it are
astonishingly bright and varied in colour. This one of the Yellowstone
fountains is of itself object enough for a trip across the continent....

“Near the Prismatic Spring is the great Excelsior Geyser, which is said
to throw a column of boiling water 60 to 70 feet in diameter to a height
of from 50 to 300 feet at irregular periods....”

But I could quote this great nature lover indefinitely. He is absolutely
fascinating on any of these subjects. See for yourself “Our National
Parks,” by John Muir, and if you are going west, as he would have you
go, quietly, with time to draw near to nature, to read and to think,
take a copy of his book with you.

Mr. Muir used his pen as a great artist uses his brush, his descriptions
are the most exquisite of pictures.

“The Fossil Forests of the Yellowstone National Park cover an extensive
area in the northern portion of the park, being especially abundant
along the west side of Lamar River for about 20 miles above its junction
with the Yellowstone. Here the land rises rather abruptly to a height of
approximately 2,000 feet above the valley floor. It is known as Specimen
Ridge, and forms an approach to Amethyst Mountain. There is also a small
fossil forest containing a number of standing trunks near Tower Falls,
and near the eastern border of the park along Lamar River in the
vicinity of Cache, Calfee, and Miller creeks, there are many more or
less isolated trunks and stumps of fossil trees, but so far as known
none of these is equal in interest to the fossil forest on the slopes of
Specimen Ridge.”

The fossil forests are easily reached over the wagon roads from the
Mammoth Hot Springs, or from the Wylie Camp at Tower Falls.

Those who really wish to see these petrified trees must make a special
point of it, or else they may be told, as I was, that the two small
stumps seen in passing are all that are there.

In addition to a large redwood stump which stands 12 feet high, there
are two trunks which stand 25 feet high and are two feet in diameter;
another, three feet in diameter and 30 feet high, etc.

In addition to these standing trees many trunks lie prone upon the
ground.

Ten species of trees have been found in the fossil forests of this park
as well as some 150 fossil plants.

For further information on this, or any other of the national parks or
monuments, apply to “The Department of the Interior,” Washington, D. C.


JACKSON LAKE

The Jackson Lake region is reached by automobile, from Old Faithful Inn,
at which place arrangements can be made for the trip.

The lake lies just north of the very beautiful Teton Range, across the
southern boundary of the park and about 70 miles from Old Faithful; this
trip makes a most delightfully worth-while addition to a visit to the
Yellowstone Park; the drive down is very fine, following the Yellowstone
Lake for a time, crossing the Continental Divide, with views of the
Absoroka Range to the east, where we see such great peaks as Mount
Langford with an altitude of 10,600 feet; Mount Shurz, 10,600 feet;
Colton Peak, 10,500 feet, and Table Mountain, 10,800 feet, standing,
snow clad, in the distance.

From Lewis Lake to the border of the park the drive follows the Snake
River, and shortly after leaving the park the river is crossed and
Jackson Lake comes clearly into view; the road leads down the east side
of the lake to Moran and here there is a small hotel where we are taken
care of.

There are lovely wild excursions to be made in every direction. Bold
peaks, unsealed by man, and glacial canyons. The great ragged peaks of
the Teton Range show every variety of shape and size: Grand Teton,
13,747 feet, and Moran, 12,100 feet, are the finest, standing as they do
only about five or six miles apart, each with a lovely lake nestled at
its base; what a superb gateway they may some day make for a southern
entrance to the Yellowstone Park if, as is now hoped, this region,
including the two mountains and the two lakes, is to be added to the
Yellowstone Park area.

Mount Moran stands majestically, directly across the lake from Moran,
where the lake is about nine miles wide; the view of this exceptionally
beautiful mountain across the clear, deep-blue water, is one not easy to
forget. To nature lovers, trampers, and climbers I commend this region.

Jackson Lake has been connected with the great system of trails which
runs all through the Yellowstone Park. The traveller taking this route
will follow the east side of the Yellowstone Lake to the extreme south
end, then the river of the same name, until, after crossing the river,
the trail follows the Atlantic Creek to the Divide, over the Divide, and
down, following the Pacific Creek to Moran.


Footnotes for Part Two

    1: Josephine Richards.
    2: Robert Sterling Yard.




PART THREE

THE NORTHWEST




    There where the livid tundras keep their tryst with the
        tranquil snows;
    There where the silences are spawned, and the light of
        hell-fire flows
    Into the bowl of the midnight sky, violet, amber, and
        rose.
    There where the rapids churn and roar, and the ice-floes
        bellowing run;

    Where the tortured, twisted rivers of blood rush to the
        setting sun.

                                          —Robert W. Service.




CHAPTER ONE

ALASKA AND CRATER LAKE NATIONAL PARK


PUGET SOUND

One might spend weeks taking the trips on Puget Sound alone, for this is
one of the most beautiful bits of salt water to be found anywhere. The
mountains seem to rise right out of the water and are wooded to the
water’s edge.

The area of Puget Sound is about 2,000 square miles and its irregular
shore-line is said to be 8,600 miles long.

Beautiful views of Mt. Rainier and Mt. Baker are had as one sails up the
sound, and to the west lie the Olympics.

To speak of the various trips here would require too much space, for
they are as numerous by land as by sea, and the beautiful roads invite
one to motor endlessly.


MOUNT OLYMPUS (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

For 60 miles or more east and west across the Olympian Peninsula, in the
northwestern corner of Washington, between Puget Sound and the Pacific
Ocean, stretch the Olympian Mountains.

Mount Olympus, 8,100 feet in altitude, rises majestically between the
Strait of Juan de Fuca and the Pacific Ocean. The peninsula is wild,
though there is a road connecting the water-front towns. Access to the
mountain is by arduous trail.

This area was set aside as a national monument to preserve the Olympic
elk, a species peculiar to the region.


ALASKA

From Vancouver, British Columbia, to Skagway, Alaska, is one thousand
miles.

This is a most fascinating steamer trip, which may also be made from
either Seattle or San Francisco. Winding between islands and the
mainland, passing glaciers with the summer sun shining overhead, the
steamers stop at various places, and the interesting Totem Pole People
(the Alaskan Indians), may be interviewed.

Captain Stretch, whose many years of connection as an engineer with
mining and railroad enterprises in the West and Alaska render him an
authority, says: “Alaska is a country unique in its geographical
situation, unique in its climate, and unique in its physical beauties.
Cape Barrow, its northernmost cape, is warmer than any point in the
world as far north of the equator; and its southern shores bordering the
North Pacific Ocean are likewise warmer than any point in the world in
similar latitudes during the winter months as the result of the
beneficent influence of the Japan current. Norway alone can approach it
in these respects, but in Norway the mountain backbone runs parallel to
the coastline, and its rivers are insignificant streams, and there is no
room for extensive valleys; while in Alaska the immense quadrangle is
divided into three zones by lofty mountains ... which leave between them
broad plains, through which such streams as the Kuskokwin, with 600, and
the Yukon, with 2,000 miles of navigable waters, open up its vast
interior. Norway and Sweden are the Mecca and Medina of the European
tourist in search of the picturesque and sublime, and the latter country
takes its annual toll of American pilgrims on similar sights intent; but
Alaska can discount anything which these countries can boast. Its
mountains overtop Mont Blanc, the Jungfrau, or the Matterhorn; its
glaciers dwarf the Mer de Glace....

“At the Childs Glacier you may loll at ease by the river bank on a
carpet of flowers while the glacier splits with a noise like a cannon
shot or the staccato reports of small arms, and watch avalanche after
avalanche start 300 feet above, driving the water in mighty waves up the
general slope below you as they take the final plunge and float away in
the narrow river. When the mist has drifted by, the dead-white face of
the ice disappears. The new dress glistens with the brilliancy of
diamonds, and the deeper recesses of the façade gleam blue as a summer
sky unflecked by clouds.

“The charm of the glaciers is never-ending.... The peace and silence of
the rock-bound fiords, clad in green, with the snowy peaks of far-off
mountains gleaming through the tree tops on the skyline, suggest the
delights of Lotus land; picture after picture more beautiful than
anything that the Hudson can show, or either Norway or the Rhine can
boast.... There are sunsets such as no painter could ever put on canvas,
veritable vortices of flame, as though the world was on fire.... Even
the sun is loath to leave the scene which his warmth has endowed with
life, and forsakes it for only a few minutes at midnight.

“Along the Alaskan Peninsula the tourist may witness in safety the
tremendous pent-up energy of the internal fires; islands raised from the
bottom of the ocean one year, only to be engulfed the next, as at
Bogoslop....”

Here may be seen: “The crowning peaks of a mountain range which,
dividing to the east, culminate in Mount McKinley, 20,464[1] feet high,
north of Cook Inlet; and Mounts St. Elias and Fairweather and their cold
virginal sisters, grim guardians of the northern shores of the Pacific.
These stupendous mountain masses (a mile taller than Switzerland’s
champion), their feet buried under a glacier which lines the coast for
more than a hundred miles, are even more impressive than the loftiest of
the world’s famous peaks, either in the Himalayas or the Andes; for
while these rise from lofty interior plateaus, the sweep of St. Elias is
from ocean to sky, with nothing to break the foreground.... The scenic
beauties of Alaska, whether they be of earth or water or of sky, are
varied enough to bring enthusiasm to the lips of the most blasé
traveller.”[2]


SITKA NATIONAL MONUMENT

This reservation lies about one mile from the steamboat landing at
Sitka, Alaska.

Here was located the village of a warlike tribe, the Kik-Siti Indians. A
celebrated witch-tree of the natives and sixteen totem poles, several of
which are examples of the best work of the tribes, stand along the
beach.


MOUNT MCKINLEY NATIONAL PARK

In 1917 Congress set aside as a national park 2,200 square miles in this
region; as in so many other cases, the reason was to protect the big
game, as well as the magnificent territory.

“Mount McKinley rises 20,300 feet above tidewater and 17,000 feet above
the eyes of the beholder standing on the plateau at its base. Its
enormous bulk is shrouded in perpetual snow two thirds down from its
summit, and the foothills and broad plains upon its north and west are
populated with mountain sheep and caribou in unprecedented numbers.

“In 1915 the Government began the railroad from Seward to Fairbanks. Its
course lies from Cook Inlet up the Susitna River to the headwaters of
the Nenana River, where it crosses the range. This will make access to
the region easy and comfortable.

“Here lies a rugged highland area far greater in extent than all of
Switzerland, a virgin field for explorers and mountaineers.

“But it must be remembered that this is not Switzerland, with its
hotels, railways, trained guides, and well-worn paths. It will appeal
only to him who prefers to strike out for himself, who can break his own
trail through trackless wilds, and will take the chances of life and
limb so dear to the heart of the true explorer. He who would master
unattained summits, explore unknown rivers, or traverse untrodden
glaciers in a region whose scenic beauties are hardly equalled, has not
to seek them in South America or Central America, for generations will
pass before the possibilities of the Alaskan Range are exhausted.”[3]


CRATER LAKE NATIONAL PARK

In 1902 Congress set aside as a national park this area of 159,360
acres. The lake lies on the summit of the Cascade Range, in Oregon, some
65 miles north of the California border. There are two ways to reach the
park, from Medford or Ashland on the west, and from Klamath Falls on the
south.

From Medford the trip, 80 miles, is made by private automobile or by
auto-stage; many interesting features are pointed out en route. The road
leads through the Rogue River Valley, beside mountain torrents, and
through Oregon’s majestic forests.

Going in via Klamath Falls, we leave the main line at Weed, and break
the journey at Klamath, where, as at Medford, there is a comfortable
hotel. From Klamath, starting in the early morning, either by private
conveyance or auto-stage, the road runs through the Modoc Valley
following the shore of Klamath Lake; if preferred, the first part of the
trip, from end to end of the lake, some 40 miles, may be made by boat.
The lake is an interesting body of water and is the home of great flocks
of pelican. At the north end of the lake the automobile must be taken
for the remainder of the trip. This region is full of the historic lore
of the Modoc Indians.

Entering the park thus, by the south gate, and driving up beside the
Anna Creek Canyon, there are very striking features to be seen; the
remarkable walls of the canyon are unlike anything else, they have the
appearance of lying in folds, and take the forms of spires and pinnacles
of every variety.

If you are in a hired automobile, insist upon being driven slowly; if
time is no object, you will probably walk while this canyon is in view.

Well within the park we become conscious of the rise in elevation, and
about three miles before reaching the rim of the crater the real pull
begins. The rim elevation is 6,239 feet.

Crater Lake is the only lake of its variety in the United States. As the
name implies, the lake lies in the crater of an extinct volcano. It has
been called: “The Sea of Silence.”

It is well that I am limited to a short space on each place mentioned in
this book, for it is a great temptation to write pages of enthusiastic
accounts of Crater Lake. I can conceive of nothing more interesting or
more beautiful in nature. The colour is indescribable. The water lies
1,000 feet below the rim of the crater, and is 2,000 feet deep.

An excellent trail leads down to the water’s edge and the descent may be
made either on horseback or on foot; the walk is absolutely easy. There
are launches and rowboats on the lake, which tempt one to explore this
most unusual and exquisite body of water from end to end, or side to
side; the lake is about five miles in diameter. Places to be visited are
Wizard Island, the Phantom Ship, and the various caves in the walls of
the crater, walls which lift their towering heads from 1,456 feet to
8,156 feet into the clear, glistening, deep-blue sky.

Guests are accommodated in the park in tents, or at the hotel, which
though not completed is in use. The hotel stands on the rim and the
front windows command a superb view.

The trip around the rim is not to be compared with anything else that I
know; it is a unique experience; it is as impossible to write of it as
it is to speak of it; one could give no adequate idea of it. Go and see
it for yourself.

The distant views on all sides are superb, as are the wooded valleys of
the park.

Plenty of time should be allowed here; for the real nature lover, there
is mountain climbing to the heart’s content, and for those who are less
strong, the never-ending changes of light and shadow, with all the glory
which colour can give.




CHAPTER TWO

MOUNT RAINIER NATIONAL PARK


SEATTLE

Seattle is one of the largest and most energetic cities of the
Northwest, most beautifully situated on Puget Sound, girded by the
Cascade and Olympic Mountains.

The city is built on seven hills and is the proud possessor of one of
the finest of harbours, a triple harbour one might almost say, for the
great salt harbour proper is connected by canal to Lake Union and again
to the great Lake Washington, some twenty miles long, thus giving an
inland fresh-water harbour of great value.

Seattle’s tallest building, to the tower of which one gladly mounts for
the superb views, is only surpassed by the tall buildings of New York
City. Seattle maintains thirty-four picturesque parks and connects them
by splendid highways. Scenically, as in many other ways, this city ranks
very high.


TACOMA

Tacoma is an industrial seaport, beautifully situated on Puget Sound, of
which it commands a fine view. Here one sees the Cascade Mountains, and
has one of the finest views possible of that truly noble mountain,
Rainier, that is, if the traveller has chosen the right time of the
year. I have sat and waited day after day in mid-summer just to get a
glimpse of any mountain, and failed, but a return trip in the spring
fully repaid me.

Point Defiance Park should be visited, and the Ferry Museum, which
contains an interesting collection of Indian baskets, domestic utensils,
canoes, and implements of hunting and war.


MOUNT RAINIER NATIONAL PARK

This park is situated in western Washington, about 55 miles from Seattle
and 42 miles from Tacoma. When the atmosphere is clear the mountain can
be seen more than a hundred miles away; it has an altitude of 14,408
feet and one of the largest glacial systems in the world radiating from
any single peak.

An excellent automobile highway has been built from Seattle and Tacoma
to the park, and trips are made daily, in good cars. The southern part
of the park is reached by rail to Ashford, on the Tacoma Eastern R. R.
(Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railroad), thence via automobile stage
to Longmire Springs, in the park. The northern part of the park is
reached by rail to Fairfax, on the Northern Pacific Railroad, and by
trails from there in; or from Enumclaw R. R. Station and from there by
automobile.

By far the finest entrance is the southern or Nisqually River entrance
via Longmire Springs and the great Nisqually Glacier. The fine
Government road running through the park winds back and forth, beside
the lovely Nisqually River, through fine forests, up the heavily wooded
mountainside, past stretches of brilliant wild flowers, stopping for one
superb view after another, until the great Nisqually Glacier is seen
close by; here we reach the end of the old motor road; from here the
trip had to be made by stage or on horseback a few years ago, the
highway ending where the eternal snows began, but to-day the splendid
motor road goes all the way to Paradise Valley. The traveller who has
been fortunate enough to take this trip will never forget it. The climb
is a steep one, 1,557 feet from Nisqually Glacier to Paradise Valley;
the road is a one-way road only, all cars leaving must pass out before
the entering cars are admitted.

The Narada Falls are visited on the way up the mountain, then comes
Inspiration Point, where a wonderful view of the Tatoosh Range is had;
the road zigzags back and forth, each view of the noble Rainier more
lovely than the last, until we arrive at Paradise Valley and Paradise
Inn, where we are well cared for, be our stay a day, a week, or a month.
From here the mountain towers above us, 8,700 feet, looking as enormous
as it did from below.

The season of tourist travel is confined largely to June, July, August,
September, and the first part of October, although parties of tourists
enter the park for snowshoeing and winter sports. The ideal time is
early in August, when the wild flowers are at their best; I have seen
the valley at this time, with a quivering cover of red, white, and blue;
the exquisite deer-tooth lily, the blue lupin, and the flaming red of
the Indian paint brush. I am told that there are 300 varieties of wild
flowers in this park.

The summit of the mountain is accessible from Paradise Valley, and from
St. Elmo Pass, on the northern side. The difficulty of the ascent
depends largely upon the condition of the snow fields, which varies from
year to year. _It is dangerous and should not be attempted unless the
party is accompanied by an official guide._

Campers are made welcome and are provided with all sorts of
conveniences, from the simplest canvas tent to the fine electrically
lighted and heated tents. Those who wish the full camping experience may
buy groceries at the pavilion and do their own cooking over open fires.
While at the same time those who wish the regular hotel comforts can
have them at the inn. Guides, horses, and outfits are furnished by the
Rainier National Park Company to those desiring to take long or short
trail outings. In recent years the trails have been extended and new
trails are opened each season; we are told that they now extend over 150
miles.


SUGGESTIONS FOR MOUNTAIN CLIMBING

The western part of the United States is so full of wonderful mountain
peaks that the desire to climb one or more is sure to be one of the
results of a western trip.

There are many important rules to be observed before undertaking one of
these ascents. Firstly, those who intend visiting any of the national
parks should be careful to go well supplied with warm clothing,
including warm sleeping apparel. Proper boots are essential; they should
be made of good heavy material and have thick, strong soles. Skirts
cannot be worn in real mountain climbing, either bloomers or
knicker-bockers are necessary. The latter garment one sees so many of
the women campers wearing that they are not at all conspicuous. It is a
great convenience to have with you a shoulder strap with which to fasten
on the extra jacket or sweater necessary for use on the crest; arrange
to have nothing in the hands but the stout walking stick which is
indispensable.

Under no consideration should any party start out to climb any of the
great mountains without the aid of a registered guide. The trails may
easily be lost, especially so as they lead frequently over snow fields
where the footprints melting from day to day make a full and accurate
knowledge absolutely essential. Again, there are important rules as to
hours of starting and arriving, in order to avoid being overtaken by
dark, or in case of being overtaken by one of the many sudden, blinding
snowstorms; also a knowledge of how fast or how slowly one should climb,
what food and drink should be taken, etc., etc., is necessary. Real
mountain climbing is not in any way like an ordinary tramp, in fact, as
we are told of something else: It is not by any to be entered into
unadvisedly or lightly, but reverently, discreetly, advisedly, and
soberly.

Where it is a possible thing, those who contemplate climbing a real
mountain should spend several days in the higher altitudes of the
mountain regions, climbing about the foothills and becoming accustomed
to the rarefied atmosphere. Strong stimulants, tea and coffee, should
not be taken, and no heavy, fried food eaten while preparing to climb.

To those who wish further information on this subject, again I suggest
that they write to the Department of the Interior, or to the National
Parks Association, either of which places will send full detailed
information.




CHAPTER THREE

LAKE CHELAN AND THE COLUMBIA RIVER REGION


LAKE CHELAN

In the Cascade Range, in north-central Washington, lies a remarkably
beautiful and, at present, little-known lake. This exquisite body of
water, some 50 miles long and about one and a half miles wide, nestles
in an ancient glacial cirque basin 1,075 feet above sea level, with
peaks one mile high surrounding it. Little has been said of this region
heretofore because of its inaccessibility, but to-day it is easily
reached by the Great Northern R. R.

From Wenatchee a train trip of a little more than one hour beside the
lovely Columbia River takes you to Chelan Station, and from there an
auto-stage takes you the last four miles to the foot of the lake.

Hotels have been built at both the upper and lower end of the lake,
where you will be taken good care of. But the thing to do here is to
take one of the camping trips and see the magnificence of the
surrounding country; the Field Hotel at the head of the lake arranges
these trips, providing all the necessities for a very reasonable price.

Boats of all varieties are to be had on the lake; only those who cannot
spare the time to see the lake in the more leisurely way should use the
motor launches, for this beautiful, green, river-like lake should not be
hurried over; if you are on it for sunset you will not be satisfied
until you have had a glorious sunrise the same way.

I am told that the fishing, in the many streams which empty into the
lake, is unusually fine.

Those who consider going to Lake Chelan should write to the Great
Northern R. R. for their excellent literature on the subject, also read
Walter Prichard Eaton’s “Green Trails and Upland Pastures,” from which I
should like to quote several pages if space were unlimited.


THE GRAND COULEE[4]

“In the heart of the vast lava plains which occupy a large part of the
States of Washington, Idaho, and Oregon, lies the Grand Coulee, a
natural feature of grandeur and wild beauty which is well worthy of a
place among the wonder sights of America, but which is practically
unknown and unvisited at present....

“The Grand Coulee is a dry gorge or canyon, cut by the Columbia River,
when it was diverted from its course ages ago in the glacial period....

“It extends nearly 100 miles across a part of the so-called ‘Big Bend’
region of the Columbia River....

“This enormous dry canyon, with its numerous beautiful lakes and its
site of a great prehistoric waterfall, which was as high as the Victoria
Falls of the Zambesi River in Africa and of much greater extent, may be
visited by tourists travelling over the Northern Pacific Railway, by
leaving the main line at Spokane and travelling over the branch line 125
miles to Coulee City, a small town situated on the level floor of the
Upper Coulee, just at the point to get most of the interesting views of
this curious region.”

Here guests can get comfortable accommodations, and from here make the
various trips by automobile, carriage, horseback, or on foot. One should
see, first, the site of the ancient cataract, with its 400- to 440-foot
wall, which separates the Upper from the Lower Coulee. About four miles
further on one comes to the brink of the western margin, and following a
short distance a wonderful panorama is disclosed, hummocks and hollows,
lakes and pools, some of clear and some of strongly saline water.

The basalt rock of the cliffs turns a rusty brown under the effects of
the weather, and is frequently covered with orange or greenish-yellow
lichens in great patches, so that the cliffs are a glorious riot of
colour.

The eastern branch of the Lower Coulee is in many respects the most
interesting and beautiful, because it is comparatively narrow, and a
large part of it is occupied by a long lake bordered by vertical cliffs;
this is called Deep Lake. A charming walk of about two miles takes one
to this part.

A visit to this region is a unique experience.


THE COLUMBIA RIVER

The Columbia River is the great river of the Far West, it is especially
interesting historically; the mere name, to those of us in the East,
recalls the old cry of “54°-40´ or fight,” the slogan of the Democratic
Convention of 1844, which elected James K. Polk President of the United
States, when this motto was inscribed upon its banner. The story of the
“Oregon Claims” makes interesting reading indeed, and history has shown
us how the matter was settled without “fight.” This beautiful river
means much to the Northwest to-day.

Taking the famous Columbia River Highway from Portland and going
westward, the traveller finds himself shortly in Astoria, at the mouth
of the Columbia River, and so on to the Pacific Ocean.

There are many trips to the beach from Portland; at Astoria the great
water craft attract attention; here the river is five miles wide and
there are fine fisheries. Across the river from Astoria and extending
from Columbia to Willapa Harbour is a peninsula known as North Beach.
This is a popular summer resort, with a superb beach, an unbroken
stretch of sand 26 miles long and from 200 to 400 feet wide, according
to the tides.

Any amount of exploring may be done on the coast of Oregon, which is
wild, rugged, and wooded in places almost to the water’s edge.

Various trips on, or beside, the Willamette River, which flows into the
Columbia 12 miles below Portland, can be made from this city.


THE COLUMBIA RIVER TRIP

The Columbia River trip is made by steamer daily, leaving Portland in
the early morning. (Hours for departing and returning on such trips are
not given, as they change from time to time, and are easily obtained in
the office of any of the hotels.)

The steamers go all the way up to the Dalles, through most unusual
scenery. The snow-crowned tops of the great mountains of the Cascade
Range, with their glaciers and dashing mountain streams, greet the eye
from time to time, while here and there magnificent cataracts lend
excitement; add to this the unending mystery of the deep, dark canyons
and gorges, and what more can one ask for a river trip?

The Pillars of Hercules are twin monuments of great height, one rising
almost from the water’s edge and the other separated by a distance of
but a few feet. Castle Rock, which, we are told, was a lookout station
for the Indians, rises 1,146 feet above the river. This rock was not
scaled by white men until 1901.

The waters of the Multnomah Falls have a sheer drop of 700 feet into a
great rock basin. These are the finest falls on the Columbia River. The
spray-filled air gives out beautiful rainbow colours.

Oneonta Gorge, a little farther up the river, is like a great garden in
the spring of the year; it leads back into the hills for about a mile,
and is carpeted with exquisite wild flowers and ferns.

We are told that at the Cascades, 45 miles east of Portland, a natural
bridge once spanned the river, the ruins of which now lie in the river
bed, obstructing the flow and impeding navigation. The story as told by
Balch in his “Bridge of the Gods” is as follows: “The red men tell how
Mount Hood and Mount Adams, situated on opposite sides of the river,
engaged in controversy, leading to a quarrel, and they resolved to
engage in combat. Advancing to a common centre, they met on the bridge.
Their combined weight was too much for the structure and it crumbled
beneath its load. The conflict was thus avoided, and the peaks returned
to their respective places.”

A canal has been constructed through these rapids, permitting steamers
to pass.


THE COLUMBIA RIVER HIGHWAY

Probably few visitors to Portland fail to take this justly famous drive;
certainly none should fail to take it. Here has been built a magnificent
boulevard reaching from Portland to the Pacific on the west and
extending to Central Oregon on the east, following the bank of the
lovely Columbia River. “The Road of Falling Waters” it has been called,
on account of the many magnificent waterfalls passed en route; of these
“The Multnomah Falls” are the most famous. In scenic grandeur it recalls
the Alps, the Rhine, and southern Italy, with all the wild bigness of
the Rockies. It is a wonderful bit of engineering, in some places the
road being cut through the living rock; again fine concrete bridges span
gorges and narrow valleys; to the south may be seen that most
picturesque of mountains, Mount Hood, and to the north, kingly Mount
Rainier, Mount Adams, and Mount St. Helens. Driving eastward one passes
over 60 miles of towering cliffs and sparkling waterfalls.

The highway at Crown Point is 700 feet above the river and gives the
traveller a superb view; from here on it drops gradually until
Bonneville is reached, where those who wish may visit the great fish
hatchery; then on through the tunnel at Mitchell’s Point to the sunken
forests of the Colorado, where I am told that giant trees are seen
beneath the waters, finally reaching the beautiful Hood River Valley.


PORTLAND

Portland is a city of peculiar charm; built upon rolling ground, between
the Cascade Mountains and the ocean, with its two exceptionally
beautiful rivers, it is provided with unusually fine scenery. The Rose
Festival, held each year in June, has attracted great attention,
Portland is called “The Rose City,” and it justifies its name, for
verily, to see the city at this time is like finding a metropolis hidden
in a fairy garden.

Back of the city, or rather to the west, rises Council Crest, which
commands a splendid view of the city, the rivers, and (when it is not
foggy) the surrounding country. Travellers who cannot arrange to stay in
Portland may get a lasting impression of its charm by stopping over a
few hours and motoring, or going by trolley, to this spot.

Council Crest is merely a pleasure park, but there is an observatory
there from which may be had an excellent view of the fine snow-clad
mountains of the Cascade Range. I have seen from here on a clear day,
Mount Rainier, Mount St. Helens, Mount Adams, Mount Jefferson, and Mount
Hood. These white monarchs stand far enough apart to be utterly
unspoiled; each is entirely different in outline from the others, and
the lights and shadows and cloud effects from here cannot be excelled.

Mount Hood, 11,225 feet, is reached by automobile from Portland. It is a
55 mile drive through the most lovely forested country, such cedar trees
as one does not often see, wonderful firs draped in long moss, stumps of
old trees long since dead, with a heavy growth of young green shoots
sprouting from them such as one sees in California. The last time I was
in Portland I had waited a week for a clear day to make this trip; as
the clear day did not come, I made it in a drizzling mist, hoping all
day that the clouds would lift just long enough to let us see the
mountain, even if only the top; it did not clear all day, but still that
drive stands out in my memory as one of the loveliest I ever took; the
mist in the forest, a dewdrop on every cedar tip and fern frond, the
waving to and fro of the glistening boughs, and the stillness and
mystery of everything, made it an unforgettable occasion. There is a
Government camp on the south slope and the return trip can be made in a
day. For those with time to stay, “Cloud Cap Inn,” on the north side,
may be better. There are a number of trips from the inn to points of
interest, but the climb to the summit is the most popular. This is said
to be the easiest peak in the west to climb. Guides are necessary here,
as for the other mountains.


OREGON CAVES (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

In the far southwestern corner of Oregon, on a slope of the Coast Range,
there is a group of limestone caves which were set aside as a national
monument, by Presidential Proclamation, under the above title.

There are two entrances to the caves, one above and one below. The
stalagmites and stalactites are unusually fine. The vaults and passages
are long, and there is one chamber 25 feet across, the ceiling of which
is said to be 200 feet high. For the traveller in this region a trip to
the caves will prove most interesting.


Footnotes for Part Three

    1: The altitudes in this book are taken, as far as possible, from
    “A Dictionary of Altitudes,” published by the U. S. Government.
    2: A. H. Brooks, Chief of the Alaskan Division of the U. S.
    Geological Survey.
    3: Robert Sterling Yard.
    4: Mr. Winthrop Haynes, “The Grand Coulee,” published in _American
    Forestry_ for May, 1914.




PART FOUR

CALIFORNIA




Note—For convenience this state is here divided into four sections as
follows:

    Northern California
    San Francisco and Environs
    Central California
    Southern California




CHAPTER ONE

NORTHERN CALIFORNIA


MOUNT SHASTA

Without doubt, the point of greatest interest in the extreme north of
California is Mount Shasta, which rises just at the juncture of the
Sierra Nevada and the Cascade Ranges, near the head of the Sacramento
Valley.

Mount Shasta is a huge extinct volcano, 14,380 feet high; it is most
accessible from Sissons, from whence the trip may be made by automobile
(12 miles) to the summit. Taking Sissons for headquarters, there are
innumerable trips to be made, on foot, horseback, or by motor. Soda
Springs, Castle Lake, the McCloud River, etc. Mr. Muir says of the trip
to the summit: “During the bright days of midsummer the ascent of Shasta
is only a long, safe saunter without fright or nerve strain, or even
serious fatigue, to those in sound health. Setting out from Sissons on
horseback, accompanied by a guide leading a pack animal with provisions,
blankets, and other necessaries, you follow a trail that leads up to the
edge of the timber line, where you camp for the night, eight or ten
miles from the hotel, at an elevation of about 10,000 feet. The next
day, rising early, you may push on to the summit and return to
Sissons.... The view from the top in clear weather extends to an immense
distance in every direction....”

The same writer highly recommends the trip round the base of Shasta,
about one hundred miles; after reading his “Steep Trails” one feels very
sure that no one could know more about this Shasta country than Mr. Muir
for he seems to have walked over every inch of it.

The railroad track runs close to the Soda Springs, in fact so near that
one must leave the car to see the Springs. Travelling either north or
south from here the views of the mountain are exceptionally beautiful,
for Shasta is one of the picturesque, single-peak mountains; rising in
solitary grandeur from a low, lava plain, it is thought by many to be
California’s most beautiful mountain; snow-clad and supreme it stands
here; it has been called the Pole-star of the landscape.

To the south of Shasta County lies a beautiful and little-known
region—the Feather River Canyon, which has been opened up by the Western
Pacific R. R.

We are told that the rivers and streams fairly teem with bass and trout;
I give the suggestion for what it may be worth, as I know no one who has
fished these waters.

The northern section of California has one great attraction: it is far
less crowded than the southern sections; here real exploring may still
be indulged in.


LASSEN VOLCANIC NATIONAL PARK

In the year 1914 Mount Lassen, after 200 years of quiet, burst forth
with a series of eruptions covering a period of 19 months.

Mount Lassen has an altitude of 10,437 feet; unlike the more familiar
examples of volcanic mountains, Vesuvius and Fujiyama, Lassen has not
one large peak, but four distinct summits, any of which may be ascended.
The view from the top is one of wonder. Seventy miles away gleams Mount
Shasta; across a line of cones and craters 150 miles long sparkles the
diamond crown of Mount Pitt. Westward and southward a vast ocean of
ridges falls lower and lower into the Sacramento Valley.

“In 1906, in order to conserve the best examples of recent volcanism,
Lassen Peak and Cinder Cone, in the same region, were set aside as
national monuments, but in 1916, after the great eruptions of Mount
Lassen, a reservation of 124 square miles in this region, including both
peaks, was made a national park.

“It is believed by scientists that the volcano will now remain quiet;
this will in all likelihood become a point of great interest to the
American traveller, being the only volcano which has been in eruption in
the national boundaries. Many tourists have already visited it. The
park, though undeveloped as yet, has other charms, such as forests,
lakes, and fine streams, but the volcano will remain the chief interest
for some time to come.”[1]


THE DEVIL’S HALF ACRE

Hot Springs Valley and the geyser country extend some 50 miles east of
Mount Lassen, as far as Mountain Meadows, and in this stretch there are
more than 200 geysers. This region is well named “The Devil’s Kitchen,”
or, as above, “The Devil’s Half Acre.” “Boiling Lake, two miles from the
geysers, is a pool of hot water 600 feet long and 300 feet wide, lying
between two streams of lava and with banks 100 feet high,” from which
there seems to be but one small outlet.


LAKE TAHOE

Going west by the Southern Pacific Railway we go so near the beautiful
Lake Tahoe that those who can will do well to stop at Truckee, and
taking the train of the Lake Tahoe Railway and Transportation Company,
follow this lovely mountain stream, the Truckee, up to the lake (15
miles). You will be made most welcome and have every comfort at the
Tahoe Tavern.

This place is mentioned on page 105 where its accessibility by
automobile from Sacramento is given, the state road thus reaching the
lake at its southern end and taking the visitors to Al-Tahoe, another
fine hotel from which the various trips may equally well be made. Small
cottages, with private baths, also open-air sleeping cabins, can be
rented by the day, week, or month.

Fine automobile roads lead in the various directions and there are
numerous trips to be made. Tamarack Lake makes a nice day’s jaunt,
taking a picnic luncheon. Cascade Lake and Eagle Falls can be reached
either by water or by automobile. Fallen Leaf Lake makes another lovely
drive. Horseback trips are plentiful, and the boating is most lovely.

For the fisherman, I am told that one June day here will bring him back
year after year.

Lake Tahoe lies 6,225 feet above sea level, it is 23 miles long and 13
miles wide. Its beauty cannot well be exaggerated. It is as lovely as
Italy’s Lake Como, and while the mountains rise round Como to a height
of 7,000 feet, these great peaks of the Sierra Nevadas have an elevation
of 11,120 feet.

It is quite impossible to do justice to the Tahoe region in short space.
There are scores of lakes, linked like a chain, and lying all round
Tahoe.

To the aviator this section must look like a glorious breastplate: Tahoe
the great central stone with the myriads of smaller lakes round it and
the hundreds of glistening, winding rivers making the platinum setting,
the whole lying lightly upon the breast of mother earth.

There are numbers of hotels, boarding-houses, and camps in this lake
region, but do not let this make you think that it is spoiled by
crowding, there are not yet as many houses as there are lakes.

Sacramento, the capital of California, is situated on the east bank of
the Sacramento River. The city is finely laid out, with wide, handsome
streets. The most important building, which attracts the eye before the
traveller reaches the city, is the State Capitol, with a beautiful dome,
which recalls that of the National Capitol. The surrounding country is
interesting. From Sacramento down to the mouth of the river the banks
are like one great garden. Here we get our first view of the beautifully
kept olive groves, the soft gray-green of the foliage reminding one of
Italy.

From here many charming trips can be made, Sacramento being one of the
railway centres for the interior of California. Electric lines also run
from here in almost every direction. The trip from this city to San
Francisco by boat is well worth while. There is a line of steamers which
makes the round trip from San Francisco several times a week.


LODI AND THE CALAVERAS BIG TREES

About 30 miles south of Sacramento lies Lodi, one of the largest
grape-growing centres of the state, and from here, by the Valley Spring
branch of the Southern Pacific Railroad, may be reached the Calaveras
Big Trees and the mining district made familiar to many through Mark
Twain’s “Jumping Frog of Calaveras” and Bret Harte’s “Bellringer of
Angels.” These writers both lived in the small town of Angels, Calaveras
County.

The Calaveras Grove of Big Trees is the farthest north of any of the Big
Tree groves, and was the first of these forests discovered. Here may be
seen some of the finest specimens of this woodland monarch. There are
about 100 trees ranging from 300 to 375 feet in height and from 70 to 90
feet in circumference. From here one may drive to the most important of
all the groves in point of number, South, or Stanislaus, Grove, where
the trees are not nearly as large, but where there are said to be more
than 1,000 of them. In both of these groves, as in the well-known
Mariposa Groves, one sees traces of the great damage done by fire. The
trees are now carefully guarded, and it is to be hoped that fires from
carelessness may never happen again. The average American citizen is
becoming more and more awakened to the value of the great nature wonders
and their preservation each year, and yet how recent is the tragedy of
the Hetch Hetchy Valley.

At Murphys, in the Calaveras district, there is quite a remarkable cave,
discovered by the miners in 1850, where there are some curious
formations and stalactites.

A wonderful trip by motor from Sacramento is made via the State Road, or
what is locally known as “The Wishbone Route.” The drive covers 275
miles, going from Sacramento to Donner Lake and Truckee, then 15 miles
along the beautiful Truckee River to Al-Tahoe, that most enticing place
mentioned on page 100. On the return trip the drive follows the lake
shore for about 25 miles, coming back to the State Road and through
Placerville to Sacramento.




CHAPTER TWO

CENTRAL CALIFORNIA


THE YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK

The usual entrances to the Yosemite Valley are via Fresno and Merced.
The best time to visit this park is perhaps April or May, while the
falls are still full. From Merced to El Portal (the gate), the Yosemite
Valley Railway runs some 70 miles along the banks of the Merced River,
for which trip the right-hand side of the train is best (right as one
stands facing the engine); the view is better from this side. The train
crosses and recrosses this gaily-romping river, and the valley view
changes continually, the walls becoming quite high in places and the
river foaming rapids.

Reaching El Portal in the late afternoon, one climbs up the winding
footpath through a picturesque tangle of brush to the Hotel Del Portal,
where all the necessary comforts are provided. After passing the night
in this delightful spot, one is taken early the next morning into the
valley proper, by a road which follows the winding course of the Merced
River, and from which giant granite walls reach up toward the sky on
either side.

Arriving at El Capitan, the great rock 7,630 feet high which stands, as
it were, at the inner gate of this Paradise, we learn that this granite
mountain exhibits to view 400 acres of bare rock! Yet this is only one
of many. The Yosemite Valley is 7 miles long and three quarters of a
mile wide. It lies 4,060 feet above sea level and is enclosed by walls
rising from 3,000 to 4,000 feet above the floor of the valley. Many are
the delightful trips which may be taken here. They are all carefully
organized and conducted by guides who know and love the place.

Before passing El Capitan we are attracted by the exquisite Bridal Veil
Falls on the opposite side, higher than the highest fall in Switzerland.
On the same side as El Capitan and beyond, we see the Three Brothers;
one of these peaks is accessible by trail; from the summit (3,700 feet)
there is one of the finest views of the valley. Next come the Cathedral
Spires, and on the south side Sentinel Rock and Sentinel Dome. North and
South Dome are most curious and especially interesting. There are trails
leading to nearly all of these individual crests now.

Of all the falls, the one called, like the valley, Yosemite, is the
finest. It is the highest known fall of its volume. The waters dash down
one half mile. The fall is in three sections, but appears all one at a
distance. In the early spring, when the volume is greatest, the booming
of the waters is deafening and the force with which it strikes the
ground shakes windows one mile away.

From Yosemite Point, the crest above the falls, the view is magnificent,
but for the full effect of this fall one should walk to the foot and
look up; the sensation received will not soon be forgotten.

The flora and fauna are enchanting. There are scores of varieties of
wild flowers, shrubs, ferns, etc. To those interested in the botany of
the valley, “Yosemite Flora,” issued by the Department of Botany,
University of California, will be of great value.

Camping in the Yosemite is more popular than life in the hotels, the
camps are provided with all the necessary comforts. Full particulars can
be had by writing to the Sentinel Hotel, Camp Curry, Camp Lost Arrow, or
Camp Awahnee.

Before leaving the valley the Lower Drive must surely be taken by those
who have not had time to take the trip on foot. The valley is so small
that the floor can be pretty thoroughly explored (as far as mere
sight-seeing goes) in a single drive, and it is most pleasing to carry
away with us a picture of this green spot, starred over with the lovely
wild flowers; it is like an oasis in a desert. The trip up the trail on
the morrow, leading over the bare, brown face of rocky cliffs, will have
amid the white of the everlasting snows and the sparkling of the
sunlight in the various falls, only the occasional appearing and
disappearing of this emerald valley threaded by the silver stream of the
Merced to give it colour. The climb to Glacier Point is made
cross-saddle only, and the traveller who has gone out unprepared can
rent a skirt by making known her want when she engages her horse or
mule. But before starting on this trip which is to take the traveller
out of the valley, I must mention the drive to the lovely Tenaya Canyon
and Mirror Lake. This is usually taken in the early morning, in time to
see the sunrise, and fully does it repay one; those planning to take the
Glacier Point Trail usually start this way and from here pass Cathedral
Rocks, Clouds’ Rest, etc., to where the horses are waiting for the
start. Glacier Point is 7,297 feet above sea level, and between 3,000
and 4,000 feet above the valley. The trail winds up the east end of the
valley, past the foot of the beautiful Vernal Falls, and up, up, over
the top, past the splendid Nevada Falls and again over the top,
zigzagging back and forth, on every turn new views greeting the sight.
Liberty Cap and Mount Star King, as seen from the point on this trail
known as Panorama View, 4,000 feet above the valley, are more impressive
than words can tell.

At Glacier Point we find a comfortable hotel, with a veranda which makes
one want to stay indefinitely, so wonderful is the view seen from it,
with the valley, the falls, and ridge after ridge of the snow-clad
Sierras. From here there are fine walks and many fine views to be had.


WAWONA AND THE MARIPOSA GROVE

From Glacier Point the trip to Wawona is made; the drive leads through
beautiful woods, via Wawona to the Mariposa Grove of Big Trees, where
the stage passes through the living gateways that have been cut through
several of these monsters. So much has been written and said of the Big
Trees that I can add nothing. I think they are the most impressive
sight, except perhaps one or two spots in the Far East, to be found in
the world to-day, and while these fine old monuments of Europe are the
dead ruins of a dead people, these great trees are the living monuments
of a world that was old before Europe was born.


THE HETCH-HETCHY VALLEY

The Hetch-Hetchy Valley is now being dammed below Kolana Rock, to supply
water to the city of San Francisco. Many persons will recall the efforts
which were made by public-spirited citizens to prevent this, and many
are still mourning the loss of this beautiful canyon as a playground,
but Robert Sterling Yard tells us, for our comfort, that in prehistoric
times the valley was once a great lake, and that the remains of Nature’s
dam are not far from the site of the dam which man is building to-day.
He adds that, with care, this restoration may not work out so
inappropriately as once we feared.

To the north of the Hetch-Hetchy Valley is the Tuolumne Canyon, famous
for its waterfalls, through which the Tuolumne River flows to the lovely
meadows of the same name. These meadows in the springtime are like
stretches of marvellous stained glass, or a freshly laid brilliant
mosaic, embedded in a surface of jade, there is such a riot of colours
from the wild flowers growing here. The river winding its way through
the meadows descends in a torrent to the Hetch-Hetchy Valley almost
5,000 feet below.


THE SEQUOIA NATIONAL PARK

“This park is the gateway to one of the grandest scenic areas in this or
any other land.

“Of the 1,156,000 sequoias, young and old, which form these groves,
12,000 exceed 10 feet in diameter, ‘General Sherman,’ the largest known
tree, being 36.5 feet in diameter and 279.9 ft. in height. Its exact age
cannot be determined without counting the rings, but it is probably in
excess of 3,500 years. There are many thousand trees in this park which
were growing thriftily when Christ was born, hundreds which were
flourishing while Babylon was in its prime, several which antedate the
pyramids on the Egyptian Desert.

“Well outside the park boundaries and overlooking it from the east, the
amazing craggy Sierras give birth in glacial chambers to two noble
rivers, the Kings River and the Kern. The canyons of these rivers are
practically matchless for the wild quality of their beauty and the
majesty of their setting.

“Unlike many areas of extreme rocky character, this is not especially
difficult to travel, it curiously adapts itself to trails. It is an
ideal land for the camper, but one must go well equipped. There must be
good guides, good horses, and plenty of warm clothing.”[2]


MOUNT WHITNEY

“The Sierra reaches its mightiest climax a few miles east of the present
Sequoia National Park, in Mount Whitney, the highest mountain in the
United States. Its altitude is 14,501 feet. The journey to Whitney’s
summit is a progress of inspiration and climax.

“From Visalia automobiles carry one under the very shadow of the Big
Trees. Over the park boundaries, into the magic of the mountains; up to
the headwaters of the Kaweah; across the splendours of the great Western
Divide; into the Kern Valley, then up winding passes, skirting
precipices, edging glaciers to the top.”[3]

Mount Whitney lies some 90 miles south of the Yosemite Valley. It is in
this region that Congress is considering setting apart another large
area, 1,600 square miles, to be known as “Roosevelt National Park,”
which will embrace both the General Grant and the Sequoia National Park.

The General Grant Park is only 4 square miles in area. It was created to
protect what is believed to be the second largest tree in the world,
“General Grant,” with a diameter of 35 feet and a height of 264 feet.

Were it not for a narrow strip of land which is privately owned, and
which separates this park from the Sequoia National Park, they would be
one.


ROOSEVELT NATIONAL PARK PROPOSED SITE

The section of California lying east and south of the above chain of
parks, the Yosemite, the General Grant, and the Sequoia, were it in any
other state than California, so full of scenic attractions, would be the
show place of the entire region, but so far, to the average American
traveller, it is almost unknown. This great Valley, so rich in beautiful
rivers, lakes, and canyons, is the proposed site of the Roosevelt
National Park.

In shape it is a long oval, lying north and south, bounded on the east
by the Sierras, with such great peaks as Mount Humphreys, 13,972 feet;
Mount Darwin, 13,841 feet; Mount Winchell, 13,749 feet; Split Mountain,
14,051 feet; Striped Mountain, 13,160 feet; Mount Buxton, 13,118 feet;
Junction Peak, 13,902 feet; Mount Tyndall, 14,025 feet; Mount Whitney,
14,501 feet; and Mount Langley, 14,042 feet. It is difficult to picture
such a wall, nine great mountains all connected by jagged peaks of
almost equal height. In this valley are rivers of inconceivable beauty,
such as the Kings River, the Kern River, and the Kaweah, each of which
has carved superb canyons and, forming lesser rivers with their forks,
has again carved lesser canyons with them.

The Kings River, rising in the Sierras and flowing southward, crosses
the valley from east to west almost at its centre, sending tributaries
in all directions. The Kings River Canyon was called by Mr. Muir a
second Yosemite; one should have that great naturalist’s gift of
expression to describe this region. The walls of the Kings River Canyon
are not as precipitous as those of the Yosemite and there are not the
great falls, but the floor of the canyon is wider and it is more
extensive, and the mountains are higher.

The Kings River has many branches, such as the Roaring River, Arrow
Creek, Woods Creek, Bubbs Creek, Boulder Creek, etc., etc., streams to
gladden the heart of any fisherman, and bordered by such meadows as only
mountain streams can produce.

The main river consists of three forks and it is hard to say which is
the most lovely. The canyon of the middle fork, “The Tehipite,” is not
as easily reached as is the south, but, judging by what Mr. Yard says of
it, it is worth going through a good deal to see it. This enthusiastic
nature lover, author of “The Book of National Parks,” says: “Time will
not dim my memory of Tehipite Dome, the august valley and the leaping,
singing river which it overlooks. Well short of the Yosemite in the kind
of beauty that plunges the observer into silence, the Tehipite Valley
far excels it in bigness, power, and majesty.

“Lookout Point on the north rim, a couple of miles south of the Dome,
gave us our first sensation. Three thousand feet above the river, it
offered by far the grandest valley view I have looked upon, for the rim
view into Yosemite by comparison is not so grand, as it is beautiful.”

The Tehipite Dome, the same writer tells us, compares favourably with El
Capitan in height and prominence, and it occupies a similar position at
the valley’s western gate.

To the south fork of the Kings River the traveller is taken to Sanger by
the Southern Pacific Railroad, and from there automobiles run daily.

An electric line runs from Visalia to Lemon Cove and there again one is
met by automobiles and driven to Juanita Meadows, where camping
accommodations have been arranged and from whence innumerable trails may
be taken. If you have gone via Hume and stopped in the camp overnight,
you may leave by pack train early the next morning and make the trip
eastward, beside the river, to Horse Corral, where you camp again, and
the third day, from Lookout Point, the descent is made to the canyon.
Passing down a three-mile zigzag trail you make a drop of more than
three thousand feet, while one beautiful view after another opens out
before you. At Cedar Creek the floor is reached and the river crossed,
then comes the six-mile ride up the canyon to Camp Kaweah, a most
beautiful trip. At this camp you may stop a day, a week, or
indefinitely. There are numberless lovely spots to be visited, the
rivers come tumbling down the gorges in cascades, or in filmy, lace-like
falls, and five or six miles farther on lies the picturesque Paradise
Valley. The trail to Bubbs Creek is one of the finest, leading eastward
and giving the view of the great Sierras. A chain of glacial lakes lies
below the trail and back of them the Kearsarge Pinnacles, University
Peak, etc. Look at your map of California and see what a marvellous
region this is. It may be reached in various ways, either by the “John
Muir Trail” from the north, or across the Kearsarge Pass, down to
Independence and Lone Pine; or again by going back to Horse Corral,
camping there and leaving the next day for Alta Meadows, across to
Mineral King, over Franklin Pass, and so down into the Kern Canyon.

The Kearsarge Pass is one of the highest of all the Sierra passes,
12,056 feet. It is literally on the sharp edge of the mountain range, so
narrow that we are told the horse strides it, standing on both sides of
the range at once; here may be seen the contrasting sides of this
wonderful range, the long, green slope of the west, and the steep, bare,
rocky descent of the east.

This great region (Roosevelt Park as we hope it is to be), 1,600 square
miles, will include both the General Grant and the Sequoia National
Parks; a trail leads from here to the Yosemite, California’s memorial to
Mr. Muir; nothing could have been more appropriate, as the trail was the
one way by which Mr. Muir felt a man could know this part of the world,
either afoot, or on horse or mule back. The southwestern area is
beautified by the Kaweah River and its five forks, and rising between
the Kaweah and the Kern rivers is the Western Divide. The Kern Valley is
said by some to exceed the Kings River Valley in beauty.

The southern portion of the whole great interior basin of California is
commonly known as the San Joaquin Valley. It comprises the San Joaquin,
the Tulare, and the Kern valleys. Its greatest length is 260 miles and
its width from 30 to 40 miles.

The Coast Range on the west of the valley has an average height of 1,700
feet, and the base averages 65 miles in width. The Sierra Nevada Range
on the east rises, as we have seen, to a much greater height. Between
these two ranges lies as well as the San Joaquin, the Sacramento Valley.
The ranges are connected in the southern part of the state at Tehachipi,
and in the northern at Mount Shasta. The length of the combined valleys
is about 450 miles and the width is 55 miles. The Coast Range is
composed of a multitude of ridges, and is intersected by numerous long,
narrow, fertile valleys, Los Angeles, Salinas, Santa Clara, Sonoma,
etc., etc.




CHAPTER THREE

SAN FRANCISCO AND ENVIRONS


SAN FRANCISCO

One must understand a little of the topography of San Francisco to
appreciate its unusual advantages. The city is built upon a peninsula,
which juts northward from the mainland, bounded on the south by San
Mateo, on the east by the San Francisco Bay, and on the west by the
Pacific Ocean.

Sausalito is situated upon a peninsula jutting southward from the
mainland to the north, and bounded on the east and west as San Francisco
is. The opening between these two points, one mile wide, is the Golden
Gate, the world-famous entrance to the beautiful San Francisco Bay.
Those entering by steamer get the best view of this great gateway. The
bay is 50 miles long and five to ten miles wide, and provides San
Francisco with one of the finest harbours in the world.


SAN FRANCISCO BAY

The bay is magnificently fortified. Points Lobos and Bonita are the two
points reaching out into the Pacific Ocean, the former at the outer
point of the crescent, which forms Bonita Cove to the north, and the
latter at the outer point of the crescent, which forms South Bay to the
south. These peninsulas extend like great arms into the Pacific Ocean,
forming the outer bay. At the inner ends are Point Diablo and Fort
Point, both fortified and impressive looking. Those who are unable to
see the bay from the water should not fail to take the Presidio Drive,
the drive to the U. S. Military Reservation, where the most wonderful
view may be had far out over the ocean.

The islands which lie in San Francisco Bay and are the most noticeable
from this city are known as Alcatras, Angel, and Yerba Buena Islands.
They are the property of the United States Government.

On Alcatras is the U. S. Military Prison. A permit is necessary to visit
the island; permission may also be had to visit Angel Island, where
there is a recruiting station, Fort McDowell. On Yerba Buena, known as
Goat Island, there is a Government Naval Training School.

The U. S. Military Reservation, known as The Presidio, comprises 1,500
acres, and lies along the bay for four or five miles. This stretch is
strongly fortified. Here may be seen Fort Winfield Scott, Fort McDowell,
Fort Baker, Fort Miley, and Fort Barry.


THE GOLDEN GATE PARK

The Golden Gate Park, of more than 1,000   acres, may be reached by
almost any of the trolley lines; laid out on sand hills and reclaimed
ground, with one end fronting on the Pacific Ocean, it is beautifully
planted with many unusual trees and plants, shrubs and flowers, and has
some 20 miles of the finest driveways. Points of special interest are
many: The Japanese Tea Garden, which really looks like a bit of old
Japan. Here two dainty little Japanese ladies serve tea. Admission to
the garden is free, but of course one pays a small sum for the tea and
rice cakes. A military band plays in the park on Sundays and holiday
afternoons. There are some good statues in the grounds: “The Wine Press”
by Thomas S. Clarke, near the front of the museum, is unusually fine. In
the Memorial Museum there is an especially good collection of Japanese
ivories, Indian basketry, and ceramics. The Academy of Sciences Museum
has very fine groups of animals and birds of the Pacific Coast. The Fern
Glen must not be overlooked; here may be seen, growing in the open,
lovely specimens of the tree fern.

On a small hill near Stone Lake stands Prayer-book Cross, erected by Mr.
George William Childs, of Philadelphia, in commemoration of the first
English church service held on this continent in 1579.


OCEAN BEACH

Ocean Beach is a favourite resort, sea bathing goes on here the year
round, but by strong and expert swimmers only, the currents being
dangerous. From the beach or the terrace in front of the Cliff House the
famous Seal Rocks are easily seen. Here one is at times fortunate enough
to he able to watch the antics of scores of sea lions.

A little north of this are the Sutro Baths and Sutro Gardens. The
picturesque Dutch windmills in the Golden Gate Park were presented by a
private citizen; they furnish water for the lakes etc., in the park.
There are several very pretty artificial lakes.

Of animals, there are about what the usual park has, buffalo, deer, elk,
etc.


PANAMA-PACIFIC INTERNATIONAL EXPOSITION

The great Exposition which in 1915 celebrated the opening of the Panama
Canal and which has now become a part of the history of San Francisco,
was held upon the site now known as the Marina. This site comprised a
tract of approximately 625 acres, with almost three miles of waterfront.
So much has been written of the beauty of the buildings, the grounds,
the statuary, etc., that it need not be repeated here; those who saw it
will not forget it and those who were less fortunate will never know
just what they missed. Through the efforts of the San Francisco Arts
Association the Fine Arts building has been saved for a time; the state
of California has taken over the California building for a normal
school. The Exposition Preservation League has plans for a fine
boulevard which is to extend from Fort Mason to the Presidio, connecting
with the present boulevard in the Presidio.


MOUNT TAMALPAIS

From San Francisco the trip to Mount Tamalpais must be made, crossing
the bay to Sausalito and from there taking the electric car to Mill
Valley, where one passes some charming homes. From here the ascent is
made (about eight miles) by what we are told is the “crookedest”
railroad in the world. Superb views are had during this climb, one
moment looking out across the blue waters of the bay, and the next
piercing the black depths of the forest, only to turn again to the
sparkling sunshine in another moment. The view from the summit fully
repays one for the trip, the Pacific Ocean stretching as far as the eye
can reach on the one side, with the ships coming and going, and the San
Francisco Bay, with its fascinating shore lines, on the other side.


MUIR WOODS

From a station part way up Mount Tamalpais a branch line runs to Muir
Woods, one of the most beautiful bits of redwood forest to be seen
anywhere. I cannot worthily describe it, one must see it. Possibly the
greatest charm of the place lies in the fact that these trees rise tall
and erect above what to us in the East would be in itself a fine forest
of oak, beech, maple, etc., the rich, variegated foliage of the
deciduous trees making a most charming contrast to the deep, dark green
of the redwood. The trees grow in circular clusters, which are explained
by the theory that the present trees are all off-shoots from giant trees
which had stood there at some time past. What giants they must have
been! These circles are from 30 to 60 feet in diameter, the trees
themselves are about 10 feet in diameter.

An exquisite stream flows through the woods and there is a fine
driveway, but to enjoy it to the full one should walk through. It is
said that the redwood does not thrive where the salt fog does not reach
it; here the soft, misty veil, which floats over and filters into the
woods from time to time, is another of its charms.

It is to Mr. William Kent, one of California’s most worthy citizens,
that we owe this National Monument. He bought it, paying $80,000 for it,
that it might not be destroyed, and presented it to the United States;
having discovered an old law enabling the United States to accept gifts
of “American Antiquities,” this collection was presented and accepted as
such. The wish of the people was to call the woods, Kent Woods, but the
modest donor insisted that it be named for Mr. John Muir, and so it is
that it appears upon the map to-day as Muir Woods.


BELVEDERE

Another delightful short trip from San Francisco is to cross the bay to
Belvedere. This little mountain of a peninsula rises up out of the water
in the most picturesque way, and is one of the loveliest spots anywhere
in this region. Beautiful homes, built up and down the sides of the
hills, each with a garden more alluring than the last, makes the whole
seem a veritable Eden. The planting goes down to the water’s edge—a riot
of colour, making the whole seem one great garden, entwined about and
laced together by the exquisite green tendrils of the soft mosses. Here
are trees of all sorts, and it seemed to me birds of all sorts. A merry,
happy, singing little spot.


MOUNT DIABLO

Mount Diablo is the peak which can be seen in the distance due east from
San Francisco; it rises 3,850 feet above sea level. A good automobile
road leads to the summit, and makes a favourite week-end drive. The view
from the summit is particularly fine, because it is so extensive. On a
clear day a nickel-plated monument is visible, through a telescope, on
the summit of Mount Shasta, 193 miles to the north, while to the south
one sees as far as Mount Whitney, over the great Sacramento and San
Joaquin valleys.


SONOMA

Sonoma, some 40 miles north of San Francisco, reached by ferry and
railway, is interesting as being one of the chief centres of the famous
vine-growing district. In this region is Santa Rosa, the home of Luther
Burbank, where he has large experimental gardens. Extensive work is also
done on his farm eight miles west of Santa Rosa, near Sebastopol, called
the Gold Ridge Proving Grounds. The farm is, I believe, open to
visitors. While at Santa Rosa it is interesting to see the church which
is built of the wood of one redwood tree.


OAKLAND

Oakland, five miles from San Francisco, is reached by ferry, and from
there we go to Berkeley, the seat of the University of California. There
are several entrances to the university grounds, and visitors are
admitted by any of them. The university is delightfully situated on the
lower slopes of the Berkeley Hills. The site comprises about 530 acres
of land, which rises gradually from 200 feet above sea level to 1,300
feet. The university is well endowed, tuition is free to residents of
California. There is to be in time a very fine collection of buildings,
many of which have already been put up. The chief sight-seeing features
of the university are the Greek Theatre, which seats 10,000 people, and
the Campanile. There are in these grounds wonderful old oaks said to be
thousands of years old; extremes in the tree family meet when one
compares these bent, gnarled gray oaks with the tall, straight dignity
of the eucalyptus trees growing round the theatre. There are several
statues in the grounds, but one in bronze, by Douglas Tilden, who is
deaf and dumb, which is known as the Football Player, is especially
virile.


LELAND STANFORD UNIVERSITY

A fine automobile road leads from San Francisco through San Mateo and
Palo Alto, to the Leland Stanford University, California’s other great
centre of learning, which, it is well known, was built by Mr. and Mrs.
Leland Stanford as a memorial to their only child.

The driveway, of about one mile from the entrance to the main buildings,
is charmingly planted with palms; the grounds are beautifully kept, and
the cactus garden is most interesting. The group of buildings is
probably as fine as any in this country. The architecture is an
adaptation of the old Spanish Mission architecture, with long
colonnades, graceful arches, and picturesque red tile roofing. The inner
quadrangle consists of twelve one-story buildings and the Memorial
Church, connected by a continuous open arcade. The decorations of the
church are very ornate; they were terribly damaged by the earthquake in
1906, but are now entirely restored.


SANTA CLARA AND MOUNT HAMILTON

Journeying southward from here we come to Santa Clara, where there is an
old mission. From there to San José (Ho-sai) one gets interesting
glimpses of the famous prune-growing district in the lovely, fertile
Santa Clara Valley where they claim to have the largest fruit-packing
house in the world. San José, a little farther south, is one of the old
historic towns; from here there are a number of trips to be made, the
most important being to Mount Hamilton, to see the Lick Observatory;
stages leave San José daily, the trip is very lovely and full of
interest. For those who can spare the time, Saturday is the day to go
up, as that night visitors are allowed to use the telescope. There is a
little inn not far from the observatory where the traveller is taken
care of. This observatory was built and endowed by a Californian, James
Lick, whose body is buried under the great telescope. The observatory
now belongs to the University of California, and possesses the second
most powerful refracting telescope in existence.


SANTA CRUZ

Santa Cruz is delightfully situated at the north end of the Monterey
Bay. All of these places can be reached nowadays by automobile as well
as by the Southern Pacific Coast Line; there are many companies that run
excursions down the coast, using large, comfortable cars and arranging
for a certain amount of small baggage; at any of the hotels this
information is given. Of course the automobile is the ideal mode of
travel these days, but it is especially so in the West, where there is
something to see on all sides, and up and down the coast, from Vancouver
to San Diego.

Going to the California State Redwood Park, we leave the main line at
Felton and take a branch road to Boulder Creek, where the stage line
starts; this is a reservation of 7,000 acres, and as beautiful a bit of
woodland as one could ask to see, covered with trees larger than those
of the Muir Woods. Here, as elsewhere, camps are provided, and the
traveller is made most comfortable for a day, a week, or a month, as he
chooses.

Monterey is situated at the extreme south of this lovely Monterey Bay;
this is one of the most interesting spots in the state historically, and
is full of old landmarks. It was the capital of California until 1849.
Perhaps the most interesting of the old buildings is the Spanish Customs
House. The first opera house of the state is pointed out, and we are
told that Jenny Lind sang there. The house in which Robert Louis
Stevenson lived is pointed out, etc., etc.


PINNACLES NATIONAL MONUMENT

“Forty miles east of Monterey, in a spur of the low Coast Range, is a
region which erosion has carved into many fantastic shapes. Because of
its crowded, pointed rocks, it has been set apart as a national
monument, under the above title, though it has long been known as
Vancouver’s Pinnacles because the great explorer visited it while his
ships lay at anchor in Monterey Bay, and afterward described it in his
‘Voyages and Discoveries.’

“Two deep gorges, bordered by fantastic walls 600 to 1,000 feet high,
and a broad semi-circular, flower-grown amphitheatre, constitute the
central feature.”[4]

The best approach is from Gilroy, which lies between San José and
Monterey.

The Hotel Del Monte, at Del Monte, is one of the most famous on the
Pacific Coast; the hotel and its gardens are among the show places of
this region. This is perhaps the best known point from which to take the
famous 17-mile drive, a drive which though still called by the old name
has been extended to many times that length, and is a very beautiful
beach drive, one not to be missed by those who are in this region.

At Pacific Grove there are lovely beaches, and here, as at Santa
Catalina Island, the glass-bottomed boats are enjoyed, from which we
seem to peep into Fairyland; as we gaze down through the clear salt
water those charming lines of Percival’s come to us:

    Deep in the wave is a coral grove,
    Where the purple mullet and goldfish rove,
    Where the sea-flower spreads its leaves of blue,
    That never are wet with falling dew,
    But in bright and changeful beauty shine
    Far down in the green and glassy brine.

At Carmel-by-the-Sea an artists’ settlement, just a short drive from
Monterey, there is an unusually beautiful beach, the sand is of dazzling
whiteness; here there are two hotels, and those who like a quiet,
restful place will revel in this spot. The old mission here is of
exceptional interest, being the burial place of Padre Junipero Serra,
the first of the Franciscan Monks who entered California, and
established the first of their missions for the Indians in 1769.

Continuing southward we come to Paso Robles Hot Springs, which rank
among the best of the many well-known hot sulphur springs. These baths
are wonderful, curatively as well as architecturally. The Indians are
said to have brought their sick here from all the surrounding country.
Splendid cures from the mud baths at this place have been reported. The
swimming pool is an unusually fine one. This is a great place for rest,
fine air, lovely walks and drives. Through the park one might wander
indefinitely; the place takes its name from the old oaks Paso Robles, or
Pass of the Oaks.

Again farther south, the stop must be made at San Luis Obispo, where
there is another old mission.




CHAPTER FOUR

SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA


Travelling south, by either train or automobile, when one runs into the
lovely Santa Barbara country, there is a feeling of satisfaction. The
coast faces due south and the mountains rising back of the valley
protect it from the cold winds. For more than a hundred miles the sea is
in full view.

Before reaching Santa Barbara the Santa Ynez Mountains are crossed; from
the crest of this range there is a fine view of the four islands which
bound the Santa Barbara Channel. The roads are of the best, the air is
like champagne, the sun is sure to be bright, and altogether this is a
most satisfying drive.

Ventura is the town for the Mission San Buenaventura, very picturesque
and in pretty good preservation. At Carpinteria we are shown what we are
told is the largest grapevine in the world, not as old as the famous
vine at Hampton Court, England, but much larger. Here also, in a
beautiful spot near the beach, the home of the author, Stewart Edward
White, is pointed out.

Santa Barbara, that lovely place called by many the Mentone of our
country, is particularly happily situated. Nestled at the foot of the
Santa Ynez Mountains, it is entirely protected by them from the north
and west winds, and here the blue waters of the Pacific Ocean, the
lovely coast and wonderful sunshine, flowers, and ocean bathing may be
enjoyed just as on the Riviera these joys of the Mediterranean are to be
found. This is one of the most charming resorts in all this
resort-filled state. At Santa Barbara there is another very fine old
mission. There are numerous trips to be made in this region. The
beautiful Cliff Drive; the San Marco Pass; the Santa Ynez Valley, etc.,
etc. The sea trips to the islands should also be made. Santa Cruz and
Santa Rosa are most interesting, and here may be found fine specimens of
the Abalone shells.

Beverly Hills is a delightful suburb, where there is a fine modern
hotel, Beverly Hills Hotel, and where every comfort may be had. This
place stands up in such a way that one seems to get more than the
ordinary share of bracing salt air; the Pacific Electric Line runs
between here and Los Angeles. A little farther on, by the same line,
Santa Monica is reached; this is a popular resort, with various places
of amusement, built on a bluff overlooking the ocean from which there is
a view of the long, white, sandy beach, which leads on to Ocean Park, a
popular resort on the order of Atlantic City, N. J.

San Pedro, the fine Los Angeles port, some 20 miles from the centre of
the city and reached by the Pacific Electric, or any one of the various
railroads of that region, is the starting place for Santa Catalina
Island. Comfortable steamers make the trip in about two hours. It may be
as smooth a crossing as any one could desire, but again I have seen it
very rough. It is a beautiful sail almost due south; one is strongly
reminded of the Mediterranean Sea here, with the deep blue of the water
and the mountainous island rising right from the sea. The first view of
Santa Catalina rejoices the soul, especially if one chances to approach
it through one of the soft white mists which at times hang over these
waters. This was the case on the day of my first trip there—the mist
lifting and rolling away, while we were still some miles off—the full
splendour of the noonday sun bringing out the island as we stood in the
bow of the approaching ship. “Santa Catalina is in reality a range of
mountains 23 miles long and sufficiently rugged in its upper reaches to
win the devotion of the most venturesome. The highest peak, Orizaba, has
an elevation of 2,700 feet. For genuine excitement the visitor will
choose a trip to the crags to hunt the wild goats. Horses, guides,
rifles, and other necessaries are obtainable on the island.”[5]

This is a spot which would satisfy any one, from the hunter out for
adventure, to the frailest invalid, with a desire only for a warm,
sunny, peaceful spot in which to rest and grow strong.

The land slopes gently down to the water’s edge. The landward side of
the island, being shaped like a great crescent, presents to the gaze of
the approaching visitor a lovely green amphitheatre in the centre of
which stands the Hotel Metropole (there are countless hotels,
boarding-houses, and camps), to the left the Open Air Theatre, where the
band plays each evening. There is an incline road, which takes to the
top of the mountain those who do not care to climb. Trails lead off on
every side. The Aquarium, though only a small beginning, has some rare
specimens. The glass-bottomed boats are a never-ending source of
delight, the small ones can be rented for very little, and one sits
spellbound, gazing down into the marine gardens, watching the
exquisitely coloured fish as they pass silently to and fro, brilliant
blue in the sunshine, dark in the shadow, while the glint of the
goldfish now here, now there, never ceases.

    “And life, in rare and beautiful forms,
    Is sporting amid those bowers of stone,
    And is safe, where the wrathful spirit of storms
    Has made the top of the wave his own.”[6]

The seaweed is so heavy in places that it suggests a forest under water,
trees with leaves of every shape, bearing various fruits and berries. In
the evening the favourite thing seems to be the small steamer, which
puts out with a searchlight, to attract the flying fish; they respond
very readily, rising and following the path of light, looking like fairy
forms with their transparent silver wings.


LOS ANGELES

Los Angeles, the metropolis of southern California, lies about 15 miles
inland. It is a fine, prosperous city, of almost unprecedentedly rapid
growth.

Los Angeles County is one of the great fruit-growing centres, the
valleys being fairly covered with vineyards; orange, lemon, and olive
groves also abound here.

The residences, in and about the city, are famous for their beautiful
gardens. The parks are fine and well kept, and the public play grounds
are the most fascinating I have ever seen. There is an interesting
ostrich farm, opposite Eastlake Park, where these birds of all ages may
be seen. There are trips to be made on all sides, but here, as
elsewhere, the hotels provide all sorts of circulars, telling in detail
of the surrounding country. In California one can hardly take the wrong
turn, for there is something worth seeing in every direction.

Pasadena, about ten miles northeast of Los Angeles, lies in the lovely,
fertile valley of San Gabriel, where thousands of tourists come annually
to the Floral Parade and Rose Tournament. More beautiful homes can be
seen here than in any other one place in California. The city is
charmingly planted. Its avenues, the finest of which is Marengo Avenue,
with its exquisite pepper trees on either side, presents a picture hard
to equal. Many of the sunken gardens belonging to private residences we
were allowed to visit; we found them all they had ever been said to be.

To the north of Pasadena is Mount Lowe. This trip is made from Los
Angeles by electric, and takes about two hours. The car stops at
Pasadena for passengers from there, then very soon begins to run upgrade
and into the Rubio Canyon, where we leave the electric and take a cable
car up to Echo Mountain, 3,500 feet above sea level, where a really
superb view lies spread before us on all sides. From Echo a car runs to
Alpine Tavern, quite an exciting bit of the trip, following in places
the very edge of the precipice. The tavern, they tell us, is 5,000 feet
above sea level; from here there are several delightful trails, all
ending in superb views, extending many miles in every direction.

Mount Wilson is a little to the southeast of Mount Lowe, and makes
another interesting excursion. Like Mount Lowe, it is reached by
electric, which takes one almost to the top. The last bit can be made on
foot. Here again are fine views, and on the summit we find the Carnegie
Solar Observatory, with the largest solar reflecting telescopes in the
world. Those wishing to remain overnight can do so; there is a small
hotel.


RIVERSIDE

About two hours out of Los Angeles, situated in the centre of one of the
most famous orange-growing regions, is the city of Riverside, one of the
most attractive of the many charming places which surround Los Angeles.

The Mission Inn is worth going a long way to see, it is an exceptionally
fine bit of the always-pleasing Spanish-Mission architecture; the
central court, or patio, has unusual charm, with its very beautiful
planting; there is a famous old orange tree here.

The city is built in the Santa Ana Valley, from which the hills roll up
on all sides. By driving or walking to the summit of one of these hills
an extensive view of the valley may be had. On one of the drives we come
upon a tablet set into a boulder, upon which may be read the following
words written by that dear nature lover whom all the West loves to
quote:

“Climb the mountains and get their good tidings. Nature’s peace will
flow into you as sunshine flows into the trees. The winds will blow
their own freshness into you and the storms their energy, while cares
will drop off like autumn leaves.”


SAN DIEGO

San Diego is the most southern port on the west coast of the United
States, it was one of the earliest settlements on this coast.

The city has a very good harbour, which is as interesting to the tourist
as it is commercially, for there are many good trips to be made by water
here; the kelp beds are especially interesting.

The climate of San Diego is famous; it is said to be equally delightful
the year round, and much is being done to make the city attractive. Six
thousand acres have been set aside as parkland; the finest is Balboa
Park, where the beautiful buildings erected for the Panama-California
Exposition, 1915, still stand.

Coronado Beach, with its great Hotel Del Coronado, is one of the most
famous of year-round resorts. The beach, some 15 miles long, lies on the
peninsula which forms the outer arm of the San Diego Bay, and is a very
beautiful stretch. The hotel, like the Del Monte at Monterey, is set in
a tropical garden; the flower beds, great sheets of colour, are an
endless delight to the Easterner; here may be enjoyed every luxury of
modern life with all the ease and freedom of the tropics.

In the old town one may see the Estudillo House, made famous by Helen
Hunt Jackson as the place where Ramona was married. This is a very
picturesque spot, the courtyard especially so, and in the garden the old
oven still stands.

Point Loma, a small peninsula which juts into the ocean at the most
northern point of San Diego Bay, should be visited; fine views can be
had from the point, and interesting caves, on the ocean side, are
visited en route. “The Theosophical Institute of Universal Brotherhood”
is on this peninsula. Here, under the leadership of Katharine Tingley,
this society has established itself and its model school. The colony is
open to tourists. The architecture is unusual.


THE AMERICAN SAHARA

The Great American Desert was almost better known a generation ago than
it is to-day. Then the hardy Argonauts traversed that fearful waste on
foot with their dawdling ox trains, and hundreds of them left their
bones to bleach in that thirsty land. The survivors of these deadly
journeys had a very definite idea of what that desert was, but now that
we can cross it in a day in Pullman cars, its real and still-existing
horrors are largely forgotten.

“The first scientific exploration of this deadly area was Lieutenant
Wheeler’s United States survey in the early fifties; and he was the
first to give scientific assurance that we have here a desert as
absolute as the Sahara. It is full of strange, burnt, ragged mountain
ranges, with deceptive, sloping, broad valleys between. There are
countless extinct volcanoes upon it and hundreds of square miles of
black, bristling lava flows. The summer heat is inconceivable, often
reaching 136 degrees in the shade; even in winter the mid-day heat is
sometimes insufferable, while at night ice frequently forms on the water
tanks.

“There are oases in the desert, chief of which are the narrow valleys of
the Mojave River and the lower Colorado. It is a strange thing to see
these soft green ribbons athwart the molten landscape.

“The Arabian simoon is not deadlier than the sandstorm of the Colorado
Desert (as the lower half is generally called). Man or beast caught in
one of these sand-laden tempests has little chance of escape.

“In the southern portions of the desert are many strange freaks of
vegetable life—huge cacti 60 feet tall and as large around as a barrel,
with singular arms, which make them look like giant candelabra; smaller
but equally fantastic varieties of cactus, from the tall, lithe
Ocalilla, or whipstock cactus, down to the tiny knob smaller than a
china cup. There are countless more modest flowers, too, and in the
rainy season thousands of square miles are carpeted with a floral
carpet, which makes it hard for the traveller to believe that he is
really gazing upon a desert.

“This American Sahara is more than 1,500 miles long from north to south
and nearly half as wide. The most fatally famous part is Death Valley,
in California.”[7]

The Colorado Desert is best known to many of us through George Wharton
James’ fascinating book called: “The Wonders of the Colorado Desert”;
according to this writer there is here a wealth of pleasure awaiting
those who care to enter into the silent places of nature.

Probably the most attractive, as well as the most convenient, points
from which to make the trip into the real desert are Riverside and
Redlands, passing through Nature’s magnificent gateway, which lies
between the San Jacinto and San Bernardino Ranges. The most satisfactory
way to make this trip is on horseback, with camping outfit. Such trips
are not for those who are dependent upon modern hotel comforts.

Mr. James says: “In the desert the soul of man finds itself as nowhere
else on earth. On every hand are strange, wonderful, beautiful things.
No hall of necromancers can equal the desert in its marvels and
revelations. Wonder follows wonder in quick succession, etc.”


MISSIONS

The Encyclopedia Britannica says:

“The Jesuit Missionaries entered California in 1697 and established
their first mission at Loreto, continuing to spread these missions until
1767, when they were expelled from the country by order of Charles III
of Spain and all their property was turned over to the Franciscan Monks,
who later moved north to upper California.... Mexico’s becoming
independent of Spain in 1822 was the death-blow to the establishment of
the Franciscans, which finally broke up in 1840 after they had founded
twenty-one missions.”

Many of these old buildings have been restored and are in a fine state
of preservation to-day; they have had a distinct effect upon the
architecture of California. The picturesque Spanish lines are
particularly suitable to this climate, where the open courts and the
beautiful arcades have a perpetual background of blue sky, with the
clear, sparkling atmosphere of California. It is impossible in a very
limited space to give a description of each mission, and there are
various books to be had on the subject—“In and Out of the Old Missions
of California,” by George Wharton James; “The Missions of California and
the Old Southwest,” by Jesse S. Hildrup, etc. A delightful trip is made
by motor, visiting each in turn; they are, mentioning them in order from
the most southern up, as they follow the coastline, San Diego, San Luis
Rey, San Juan Capistrano, San Gabriel, Los Angeles, San Buenaventura,
Santa Barbara, Santa Ynez, La Purisima Concepcion, San Luis Obispo, San
Miguel, San Antonio, Mission Soledad, San Carlos, San Juan Bautista,
Santa Cruz, Santa Clara, San José, Mission Dolores, San Rafael
Archangel, Mission San Francisco Solano.

These missions were built a day’s walk apart in order that the
travellers on foot could always find shelter at the end of a day’s
tramp. In Los Angeles there is given each year a mission play
commemorating this period in the history of California. An ambulatory
surrounding the playhouse shows models of all the missions in their
order; a visit to this place and witnessing a performance of the play
will do much toward impressing upon the tourist the early settlement of
this part of the west coast.


Footnotes for Part Four

    1: Mr. Yard.
    2: Department of the Interior.
    3: Department of the Interior.
    4: Robert Sterling Yard.
    5: Drury.
    6: J. G. Percival.
    7: Lummis.




PART FIVE

THE SOUTHWEST




    I’ve stood in some mighty-mouthed hollow
        That’s plum-full of hush to the brim;
    I’ve watched the big, husky sun wallow
        In crimson and gold, and grow dim,
    Till the moon set the pearly peaks gleaming,
        And the stars tumbled out, neck and crop;
    And I’ve thought that I surely was dreaming,
        With the peace o’ the world piled on top.

                                        —SERVICE




CHAPTER ONE

THE GRAND CANYON


The Grand Canyon of the Colorado is the world’s most famous gorge, in
which Mr. Lummis says: “All the world’s famous gorges could be lost
forever.”

Charles Dudley Warner said of this spot: “Human experience has no
prototype of this region, and the imagination has never conceived of its
forms and colours.... The scene is one to strike dumb with awe, or to
unstring the nerves.... All that we could comprehend was a vast
confusion of amphitheatres and strange architectural forms resplendent
with colour.... Streaks of solid hues 1,000 feet in width, yellows
mingled with white and gray, orange, dull red, brown, blue, carmine, and
green all blending in the sunlight into one transcendent effusion of
splendour.”

Here is truly one of the most marvellous nature wonders of the world,
and comparatively few of us have seen it. It is stupendous! It is
incomprehensible!

The canyon lies chiefly in Arizona, though Utah, Nevada, and California
touch each a corner. It is nearly 300 miles long and in places 6,600
feet deep; the width at the top is from 8 to 20 miles. The river lying
below is in places 300 feet wide, and is 2,400 feet above sea level; yet
looking down from the rim it seems the smallest stream, the merest
thread.

The Santa Fé trains run twice a day to the canyon.[1] There is a fine,
big hotel, the El Tovar, with every modern comfort, built on a site
7,000 feet above sea level and quite near the rim, commanding such a
view as can hardly be equalled in the world.

Mr. C. A. Higgins in his “The Titan of Chasms,” says: “Stolid indeed is
he who can front the awful scene and view its unearthly splendour of
colour and form without quaking knee or tremulous breath. An inferno
swathed in soft, celestial fires; a whole chaotic under-world, just
emptied of primeval floods and waiting for a new creative word; eluding
all sense of perspective or dimension, outstretching the faculty of
measurement, overlapping the confines of definite apprehension; a
boding, terrible thing, unflinchingly real, yet spectral as a dream....
A labyrinth of huge architectural forms, endlessly varied in design,
fretted with ornamental devices, festooned with lace-like webs formed of
talus from the upper cliffs and painted with every colour known to the
palette in pure, transparent tones of marvellous delicacy.

“A canyon, truly, but not after the accepted type. An intricate system
of canyons, rather.... Only by descending into the canyon may one arrive
at anything like comprehension of its proportions, and the descent
cannot be too urgently recommended to every visitor who is sufficiently
robust to bear a reasonable amount of fatigue.”

There are several paths down the southern wall of the canyon, and the
trip is safely made on horseback. A word of advice here in regard to
clothing may be of use. It is absolutely necessary to have good, warm
clothing with one, for the night, which is spent on the floor; but for
the descent a light shade hat is advisable; the heat of the afternoon
sun can be very oppressive.

Mr. William Winter said of the Grand Canyon: “It is a pageant of ghastly
desolation and yet of frightful vitality, such as neither Dante nor
Milton in their most sublime conceptions ever even approached.... Your
heart is moved with feeling that is far too deep for words. Hour after
hour you would sit, entranced, at the edge of this mighty subterranean
spectacle, lost in the wonder and glory of it, forgetful of self, and
conscious only of the Divine Spirit.”

“If the falls of Niagara were installed in the Grand Canyon between your
visits—and you knew it by the newspapers—next time you stood on that
dizzy rimrock you would probably need good field-glasses and much
patience before you could locate that cataract which in its place looks
pretty big. If Mount Washington were plucked up bodily by the roots—not
from where you see it, but from sea level—and carefully set down in the
Grand Canyon, you probably would not notice it next morning, unless its
dull colours distinguished it in that innumerable congress of larger and
painted giants.

“All this, which is literally true, is a mere trifle of what might be
said in trying to fix a standard of comparison for the Grand Canyon. But
I fancy there is no standard adjustable to the human mind. You may
compare all you will—eloquently and from wide experience—and at last all
similes fail. The Grand Canyon is just the Grand Canyon, and that is all
you can say. I never have seen any one who was prepared for it. I never
have seen any one who could grasp it in a week’s hard exploration; nor
any one, except some rare Philistine, who could even think he had
grasped it. I have seen people rave over it; better people struck dumb
with it; even strong men who wept over it; but I have never yet seen the
man or woman who expected it.”[2]

Last, but by no means least, let me quote a few words from an article
published in the _Century Magazine_ by Mr. John Muir:

“It seems a gigantic statement for even Nature to make, all in one stone
word. Wildness so Godful, cosmic, primeval, bestows a new sense of
earth’s beauty and size.... But the colours, the living, rejoicing
colours, chanting, morning and evening, in chorus to heaven. Whose brush
or pencil, however lovingly inspired, can give us these? In the supreme
flaming glory of sunset the whole canyon is transfigured, as if all the
life and light of centuries of sunshine stored up in the rocks was now
being poured forth as from one glorious fountain, flooding both earth
and sky.”

It is a happy thing to be able to quote such men as the above, for I am
among the number of those who were struck dumb by the sight of this
place. I can find no words which would give any idea of the impression
made upon me by the canyon, I can only advise those planning a western
trip to see it, without fail, either going or returning; the time of the
year does not matter, the El Tovar is open to you the year round.


THE PAINTED DESERT

Among the interesting trips in this region is that to the Painted
Desert, of which one hears little, probably because it is a difficult
trip; still it is perfectly possible for any ordinarily hardy traveller.
Five to seven days should be allowed for the journey which is made on
horse- or mule-back. The descent to the floor of the canyon is a rough
ride and very fatiguing, but by no means dangerous. The trail leads down
canyon after canyon, dropping lower and lower, for it must be remembered
that the Painted Desert lies 200 feet below sea level, while the rim of
the canyon from which we start is 7,000 feet above sea level. One can
readily imagine the change in temperature in such a descent (mentioned
elsewhere); the mercury stands at times at 115°; however, those who care
to put up with the hardships are likely to feel themselves fully repaid.

An experienced guide is necessary, especially on account of the
quicksands which must be avoided in crossing the Little Colorado River.
The colours of the sand, the mountains, and the sky are indescribable;
they are so brilliant as to seem absolutely unreal, while beyond in the
distance is seen, in all its dazzling whiteness of snow-capped peaks,
the lovely San Francisco range, a fitting background for this mad riot
of colour.


PETRIFIED FOREST (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

“The Fossil Forest of Arizona, one of the most remarkable features of a
state noted for its scenic wonders, is situated a few miles south of
Adamana, a station on the Santa Fé Railroad in Apache County.... Only
within a few years have accommodations and transportation facilities
been such as to tempt more than a very small proportion of the tourists
and travellers to ‘stop off’ on their through tickets to the Grand
Canyon and Pacific Coast. Since the setting aside of the area as a
national monument, and the appointment of a superintendent, the way has
become easy, and the constantly increasing number of visitors has made
the preparation of some form of scientific account of the Forest almost
a necessity.”

This Mr. George Perkins Merrill follows with a careful geological
account of the forest, which can be had by those who wish to go
carefully into the matter.

Here, as in the Great Petrified Forest in the Arabian Desert, so called
to distinguish it from the one near Cairo, known as the Petrified
Forest, the trees are fallen and lie prone upon the ground, glittering
fragments of carnelian and jasper all about them. There are not even
standing stumps here, as in the Great Petrified Forest of the Arabian
Desert and the Yellowstone Forests where superb specimens still may be
seen.

There are within the reservation four forests, but the first is the one
most generally visited. This first is about six miles from Adamana; it
is easily reached in an hour and a half. The second forest is two and
one half miles south of the first, the trip taking about half an hour
each way. The third forest covers a greater area than the others, it is
13 miles southwest of Adamana and 18 miles southeast of Holbrook. The
third forest, known as the Rainbow Forest, is the principal one; it is
often called Chalcedony Park. The ground here seems strewn with jewels,
and one has the feeling of being in an enchanted spot; the colours are
most brilliant; chalcedony, opals, and agates are found here.

One of the most interesting features of this region is the Natural
Bridge, consisting of a great petrified trunk of jasper and agate lying
across a canyon 60 feet wide and 20 feet deep, and forming a foot-bridge
over which any one may easily pass.




CHAPTER TWO

HISTORIC PLACES IN NEW MEXICO AND ARIZONA


NEW MEXICO

“Here we begin to realize that this is an old country rather than a new.
Americans are prone to talk about the ‘Settlement Period,’ of Bradford
and Brewster, of Captain John Smith and Henry Hudson. But it is well to
remember that nearly a century before the _Half Moon_ sailed up the
Hudson or the _Mayflower_ dropped her anchor in Massachusetts Bay, the
mailed warriors of Cabeza de Vaca and Coronado had discovered the
terraced cities of Zuni, where men were clothed in cotton and wool of
their own weaving, lived in stone houses, and cultivated the soil.”

At Albuquerque we find ourselves in a half-American and half-Mexican
city. It is a junction point of the Santa Fé and the metropolis of New
Mexico. Many travellers stop here for a day or two, to break their
journey.

The Alvarado, a Harvey hotel, has a fine collection of Indian relics and
products and here one is likely to see the Navajo and Hopi weavers,
potters, silversmiths, and basketmakers at work.

“Santa Fé lies at the base of a mountain range nearly 2,000 feet higher
than Albuquerque, a few miles off the main line of travel, on a branch
line. Lamy is the main line junction point, where one changes cars to
reach Santa Fé. When first visited by the Spanish, about 1540 (a century
before Boston was settled), the town was a populous Indian pueblo. You
may read its varied history in the guide books and study its priceless
records in the old territorial ‘Palace.’ The Casa Viejo, or old house,
where Coronado is said to have lodged in 1540, and the church of San
Miguel, which was sacked in 1680, are not distinguishable from their
surroundings by any air of superior age. All is old, a bit of desiccated
Granada of the 16th century.”


HOPILAND, WOLPI AND ORAIBI

“There are many ways of getting into the Hopi country, but there are
three commonly used routes, each of which has certain advantages. At the
starting-point of each one of them conveyances may easily be secured for
the trip. The three points are the stations of Holbrook, Winslow, and
Canyon Diablo, all along the line of the Santa Fé. The Hopi country
stretches out north of these three stations; the distance is about the
same from each. Holbrook possesses one advantage over the other two
routes: the town is situated on the Hopi side of the Little Colorado
River; consequently, the question as to whether the river is fordable
need not be considered.

“The distance from Holbrook to Wolpi, the easternmost of the Hopi
villages, is about 80 miles. This trip, with camping outfit, usually
requires about three days.

“Winslow, a much larger town than Holbrook, is a division point on the
Santa Fé, and has several hotels and livery stables. Of the latter the
writer is able to recommend, from much personal experience, that kept by
Mr. Creswell. The route from Winslow to Oraibi, the westernmost village,
is not quite 80 miles.

“Canyon Diablo has neither hotel nor livery stable. Mr. Volz, the Indian
trader at this point, will, with advance notice, furnish the
necessities. Should there be ladies in the party, and should it be
possible to secure Mr. Volz’s personal services for the journey, this
route offers certain advantages not to be found by either of the other
two, and the cost is about the same.

“Whether our journey be made in winter or summer, spring or autumn, we
are sure to intrude upon (for they are not to be considered in any sense
as ‘shows’) one or more of the great ceremonials, usually an invocation
for rain, a propitiation of the gods of the winds for bountiful
harvests, or a general thanksgiving for protection, with the brilliant
public pageant at the close. But smile not at the curious sand altars,
with the ‘tiponi’ or palladium of the fraternity, the childlike ‘bahos’
and ‘nakwakwosi,’ or prayer-sticks and offerings, nor let the ears or
eyes be offended by the chanting of the songs to the gods of sun, of
winds and of rain, or the ceremonial dances of the priests, for they are
serious affairs to the native participants.”[3]

“It is in these strange, cliff-perched little cities that one of the
most astounding barbaric dances in the world is held. Africa has no
savages whose mystic performances are more wonderful than the Hopi snake
dance.

“The snake is an object of great respect among all uncivilized peoples,
and the deadlier his power, the deeper the reverence for him. The Hopi
often protect in their houses an esteemed and harmless serpent—about
five or six feet long—as a mouse trap; and these quiet mousers keep down
the little pests much more effectively than a cat, for they can follow
shee-id-deh to the ultimate comer of his hole.”

Up to a generation ago every pueblo protected at least one rattlesnake,
but now the Hopi Indian alone continues the custom. Once a year the
remarkable ceremony of the snake dance is still performed, and Mr.
Lummis, from whom the above is quoted, tells us that after the dance is
over he has seen a hillock of rattlesnakes a foot high and four feet
across.

“The dancers leap about this squirming pile while sacred corn meal is
sprinkled, then thrust each an arm into the mass, grasp a number of
snakes, and go running at top speed to the four points of the compass,
and thus the unharmed snakes are released.”


THE NAVAJO RESERVATION

To the north and east of the Hopi Reservation is the Navajo Reservation,
also accessible by the Santa Fé Railroad. These Indians, unlike their
neighbours, will not even touch a snake. Mr. Lummis tells a most
interesting story of his having had a Navajo Indian make for him a
silver bracelet in the form of a snake. So extreme are their prejudices
that this silversmith was almost beaten to death by his fellows, and the
bracelet, together with his hut, were destroyed.

The Navajo reveres the bear as the Hopi does the snake. They even go so
far as to make prayers and sacrifices to him. They are the most
wonderful of jugglers. Dr. Washington Matthews, who was the foremost
student of Navajo customs, said officially: “I have seen many fire
scenes on the stage, many acts of fire-eating and fire-handling by
civilized jugglers, but nothing comparable to this.”

The Navajo blanket is known all over this country; these Indians and the
Hopi are especially famous for their weaving. But it is not to-day what
it used to be; the blanket to-day is made to sell, not to wear.

The Navajo Reservation is now a national monument, and protects three
extensive prehistoric pueblos, or cliff dwellings, in a good state of
preservation.


RAINBOW BRIDGE (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

In the Navajo Indian Reservation may be seen the Rainbow Bridge National
Monument. The bridge is 309 feet above the water, and its span is 279
feet. Among the natural bridges of the world this one is said to be
unique, having not only a symmetrical arch below but presenting also a
curved surface above, thus having the appearance of a rainbow. An
unusual trip may be made from here to the Natural Bridge National
Monument, a distance of 160 miles.


PUEBLO OF COCHITI

“The most extensive and wonderful cave communities in the world are in
the great Cochiti upland, some 50 miles northwest of Santa Fé, New
Mexico. The journey is a very laborious one, but by no means dangerous;
and if you can get a good guide, you are apt to remember it as the most
interesting expedition of your life.

“In the superbly picturesque canyon of the Rito de los Frigoles is the
largest of all the villages of caves, deserted for more than 400 years.
Outside its unnumbered cave rooms were more rooms yet, of masonry of
‘bricks’ cut from the same cliff.

“A few miles farther up the Rio Grande, not down in a canyon, but on the
top of a great plateau, nearly 2,000 feet above the river, are two huge
castle-like buttes of chalky tufa, each some 200 feet high. They stand
one on each side of the Santa Clara Canyon, and are known to the
Indians, respectively, as the Puye and the Shu-fin-ne. They are the most
easily accessible of the large cave villages of North America, not being
more than 10 miles from the little railroad town of Espanola, on the Rio
Grande, some 30 miles by rail from Santa Fé.

“In this same wild region are the only great stone idols (or, to speak
more properly, fetiches) in the United States—the mountain lions of
Cochiti. They are life size and carved from the solid bedrock on the top
of two huge mesas. To this day the Indians of Cochiti, before a hunt, go
to one of these almost inaccessible spots, anoint the great stone head,
and dance by night, a wild dance, which no white man has seen or ever
will see.”[4]


THE PUEBLOS OF ACOMA AND LAGUNA

Acoma is 13 miles south of the Santa Fé Railway in the western part of
New Mexico. It is reached from Laguna, which is in itself another most
interesting place; it is the most recent of all the pueblos, having been
founded in 1699.

“Of all the 19 pueblos of New Mexico, Acoma is by far the most
wonderful. Indeed, it is probably the most remarkable city in the whole
world. Perched upon the level summit of a great ‘box’ of rock whose
perpendicular sides are nearly 400 feet high, and reached by some of the
dizziest paths ever trodden by human feet, the prehistoric town looks
far across the wilderness. Its quaint terraced houses of gray adobe, its
huge church—hardly less wonderful than the pyramids of Egypt as a
monument of patient toil—its great reservoir in the solid rock, its
superb scenery, its romantic history and the strange customs of its 600
people, all are rife with interest to the few Americans who visit the
isolated city. Neither history nor tradition tells us when Acoma was
founded. The pueblo was once situated on the top of the Mesa Encantada
(Enchanted Tableland), which rises 700 feet, near the mesa now occupied.

“The present Acoma was an old town when the first European—Coronado, the
famous Spanish explorer—saw it in 1540. With that its authentic history
begins—a strange, weird history, in scattered fragments....

“Acoma is a labyrinth of wonders of which no person alive knows all; the
longest visit never wears out its glamour. One feels as among scenes and
beings more than human, all of whose rocks are genii and whose people
swart conjurors. It is spendthrift of beauty.... It is the noblest
specimen of fantastic beauty on the continent.”

Laguna lies some 20 miles northeast of Acoma. Mr. Lummis, from whom the
above is quoted, tells a most interesting story of a law-suit carried on
between these two cities over the picture of a saint. The story is told
in “Some Strange Corners of Our Country.” Not only does the writer know
these strange corners, but he has a wonderful way of making his readers
see them.


THE APACHE

The Apache reservations are in Arizona and New Mexico. There is one,
about 100 miles from El Paso, on the border of Texas and New Mexico, but
perhaps the most accessible for tourists is the San Carlos Agency of the
White Mountain Reservation, reached by stage from Holbrook, a distance
of about 96 miles.

There are no Apache ruins, for this tribe lived in tepees made of twigs,
and not in pueblos or permanent houses.

Basketmaking is the principal industry among the women.


CAPULIN MOUNTAIN (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

“This mountain in northeastern New Mexico is a volcanic cinder cone of
recent origin, six miles southwest of Folsom. It is the finest specimen
of a group of craters. Capulin has an altitude of 8,000 feet and rises
1,500 feet above the surrounding plain. It is almost a perfect cone. It
is easily reached by either rail or automobile.”


BANDELIER NATIONAL MONUMENT

Eighteen miles west of Santa Fé, N. M., in a beautiful valley with high
surrounding walls some six miles long, and about one half mile wide,
with an entrance narrow enough to admit but two persons abreast, may be
seen the home of a people who lived in caves. This is a region full of
interest; there is here a large area which has been suggested for a
national park, to be called: “The Cliff Cities National Park”; it is
reached by automobile from Santa Fé.


ZUNI

Zuni is also reached by the Santa Fé R. R. from Gallup. This is said to
be the largest of all the pueblos. At Zuni, Mr. Frank Hamilton Cushing
passed many years of his life, as a member of the tribe. This famous
ethnologist probably learned more of the real Indian, because more
closely associated with him, than any other white man has done; he is
the authority on this particular tribe.

Conveyances can be had at Gallup for the trip to Zuni, which is
generally made in a day. The pueblo lies in a level plain on the
southern bank of the Zuni River; it may be seen at quite a distance,
owing to the irregularity in the height of the houses, some of which are
five stories, and the irregular lay of the ground upon which they are
built.

To the traveller who has been to Acoma, Zuni may be disappointing, or
rather the approach to Zuni, Acoma being built upon a great rock mesa;
but why compare such different spots? Each has its own charm. The
ladders which are seen upon all sides at Zuni add greatly to its
picturesque appearance; they have been well described as: “A wilderness
of masts.”

Pottery is the great industry of the Zuni, in which art they excel; not
only are the jars, bowls, etc., beautifully shaped, but the decorative
designs, mostly semi-geometric, and the combining of the reds, browns,
and black is wonderfully artistic.

A great many religious rites exist in Zuni, some such celebration taking
place every month, many in the open air, so that it is possible that the
tourist may chance upon one of these at almost any time. There is a
famous Zuni dance held in November each year, which may be witnessed by
all. There are many shrines in this vicinity where visitors are allowed,
the most important of which is the one on Thunder Mountain, quite a
climb, but worthy the effort; here the Zuni still make their offerings
of prayer-sticks, etc., to the gods to whom this shrine is dedicated.

From Zuni the trip into the Painted Desert may be made.


EL MORRO (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

In western central New Mexico there is an enormous sandstone rock,
rising some 200 feet out of a plain, which, having a small spring of
water at its base, seems to have made it a valuable camping place for
the Spanish explorers.

This rock contains some 21 Spanish inscriptions, the earliest of which
is dated February 18, 1526; the most interesting is probably that of
Juan de Onate, the founder of the city of Santa Fé in 1606.


THE GRAN QUIVIRA (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

“Eighty miles southwest of Albuquerque, in the hollow of towering desert
ranges, lies the arid country which Indian tradition calls the Accursed
Lakes. Here at the points of a large triangle sprawl the ruins of three
once flourishing pueblo cities, Abo, Cuaray, and Tabirá. When the
Spaniards came these cities were at the flood-tide of prosperity.”[5] At
Tabirá was built one of the important early Spanish missions. The towns
were discovered in 1581. The reservation preserves this interesting
mission ruin in Central New Mexico.


PHOENIX AND THE ROOSEVELT DAM

Phoenix, the capital of Arizona, is the starting point for several
places of interest, the chief, perhaps, being the Roosevelt Dam.

This very picturesque and splendid dam is built in a narrow canyon about
80 miles from Phoenix; it holds in a fine natural basin a great wealth
of water. The lake fills a valley 28 miles long, and in the hillsides
surrounding the water there are remains of cliff and cave dwellings;
here ancient and modern masonry meet. These dwellings are known as the
“Tonto National Monument.”


THE APACHE TRAIL

For the traveller the most interesting feature in this region is the
Apache Trail. An auto-stage leaves Phoenix daily for what is known as
the Globe-Miami district, 120 miles away. The trail leads through the
Salt River Valley, the Apache Gap (said to be the scene of a battle
between the 7th Cavalry and the Apaches in 1886), to No Man’s Land, and
Summit, altitude 3,470 feet. On the descent are unusual panoramic views
of castellated cliffs and deep mountain gorges, with the usual magic
desert colouring.

The trail leads past the Roosevelt Dam and lake with fine views all the
way to Globe, the home of the Old Dominion Copper Co., and Miami, of the
Inspiration Copper Co., both mining towns.


TUCSON

Tucson is a close rival of Phoenix. This old town still has some of the
charm of ancient Mexico. A few miles from Tucson there is one of the
finest and best preserved old missions of the Southwest, San Xavier. The
outside has been considerably restored and, unfortunately, whitewashed,
all but the central portion, which happily is in the original brownish
colour. The interior decorations, very ornate, are the originals. The
crudely carved wooden lions at the sides of the altar rails date
undoubtedly from the founding, supposed to have been 1692.


THE PAPAGO SAGUARO (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

About nine miles east of Phoenix and 12 miles from the Apache Trail, a
small area has been made a national monument on account of its splendid
examples of characteristic desert flora. Here are to be seen striking
specimens of the giant cactus, Saguaro, which attains a height of 30 to
35 feet and is of a beautiful cylindrical form. Not only this, but many
other interesting species of cacti and yucca grow here.


WALNUT CANYON (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

Thirty cliff dwellings cling to the sides of the picturesque Walnut
Canyon, eight miles from Flagstaff, Arizona. They are excellently
preserved. The largest contains eight rooms. This canyon possesses
unusual beauty because of the thickets of locust which fringe the trail
down from the ruins. Some of the ruins are only accessible by ladder.
Because of its nearness to Flagstaff this group of dwellings is easily
visited.


MONTEZUMA CASTLE (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

“Montezuma Castle, a remarkable relic of a prehistoric race, is the
principal feature of a well-preserved group of cliff dwellings in the
northeastern part of Yavapai County, Arizona. Its position and size give
it the appearance of an ancient castle. The structure is about 50 feet
high by 60 feet wide, built in the form of a crescent. It is five
stories high, with walls of masonry and adobe, plastered inside with
mud.”


THE CASA GRANDE (NATIONAL MONUMENT)

This is one of the most remarkable prehistoric ruins in the country. It
is about 70 miles from Tucson, perhaps nearer the border town of Sonora.
“A building of large size, evidently this was an important centre of
population. The builders were probably Pima Indians. Whatever its
origin, the community was already in ruins when the Spaniards found it.”

The first report we have of it is in 1539. The whole is now roofed over
for protection.


AN APPEAL TO TOURISTS

It is earnestly requested of all travellers, old and young alike, that
they shall do their part toward preserving unimpaired the beauty of the
spots that they visit, and that instead of disfiguring the landscape by
scattering the débris of their lunch-baskets, together with torn papers
and broken boxes, all along their route, they shall conscientiously
avail themselves of the trash-cans everywhere liberally provided for
their use.

The names of a few reference books are herewith appended in order that
the traveller who is especially interested in any particular line may be
enabled to find some extra information along that line if he so wish.

Doubtless there are countless other books to be had on any of these
subjects, but I have tried to name one which will be of service in
looking up birds, trees, flowers, pottery, blankets, glaciers, Indian
basketry, cliff dwellings, etc., etc.

THE END


Footnotes for Part Five

    1: From Williams, Ariz.
    2: Charles F. Lummis.
    3: Mr. W. H. Simpson, A. T. and S. F. R. R.
    4: Drury.
    5: Robert Sterling Yard.




REFERENCE BOOKS

A Study of Pueblo Pottery, _F. H. Cushing_

A Thousand Mile Walk to the Gulf, _John Muir_

A Tramp Across the Continent, _Chas. F. Lummis_

Arizona Nights, _Stewart Edward White_

Arizona and New Mexico, _H. H. Bancroft_

Beyond the Rockies, _C. A. Stoddard_

Birds of California, _Wheelock_

Birds of the Rockies, _L. S. Keyser_

California and the Southwest, _F. W. Martin_

California Desert Trails, _Joseph, S. Chase_

California Missions and Landmarks, _Mrs. A. S. C. Forbes_

California Tourist’s Guide, _Wells Drury_

California Wild Flowers, _Theodore Payne_

Designs on Prehistoric Pottery, _J. W. Fewkes_

Fifteen Thousand Miles by Stage, _C. A. Strahorn_

Flora of Middle Western California, _Jepson_

Flora of the Rocky Mountains and Adjacent Plains, _P. A. Rydberg_

Flora of the West Coast, _C. V. Piper_

Forest Trees of the Pacific Slope, _G. B. Sudworth_

Glaciers of Mount Rainier, _I. C. Russell_

Glaciers of North America, _I. C. Russell_

Highways and Byways of the Rocky Mts., _C. Johnson_

In and About the Grand Canyon of Arizona, _G. W. James_

In and Out of the Old Missions, _G. W. James_

In the Heart of the Sierras, _J. M. Hutchings_

In the Land of the Cliff Dweller and Indians of To-day, _T. M. Prudden_

Indian Basketry, _G. W. James_

Indians of the Painted Desert, _G. W. James_

Indians of the Yosemite Valley, _Galen Clark_

Indians of To-day, _G. B. Grinnell_

Journal of a Trip Through the Western Country, _Theo. Winthrop_

Land of the Cliff Dwellers, _F. S. Chapin_

Land of Poco Tiempo, _C. F. Lummis_

Land of To-morrow (Alaska)

Land of Enchantment from Pike’s Peak to the Pacific, _Lillian Whiting_

Mountains of California, _John Muir_

Mountaineering and Exploration in the Selkirks, _Howard Palmer_

My First Summer in the Sierras, _John Muir_

Native Races, _H. H. Bancroft_

Navajo and His Blankets, _U. S. Hollister_

Navajo Weavers, _Washington Matthews_

Nevada, Colorado, and Wyoming, _H. H. Bancroft_

Official Manual of Motor Car Camping, _A. L. Westgard_

On the Great American Plateau, _T. M. Prudden_

Our National Parks, _John Muir_

Rambles Overland, _A. Gunnison_

Rocky Mountain Flowers, _Clements & Clements_

Romance of the Colorado River, _Dillenbaugh_

Romantic California, _E. C. Peixotto_

Silent Places (Alaska), _S. Ed. White_

Some Strange Corners of Our Country, _Chas. F. Lummis_

Spell of the Rockies, _E. A. Mills_

Steep Trails, _John Muir_

Summer Tour of Southern California, _S. W. Long_

Tales of a Pathfinder, _A. L., Westgard_

Ten Thousand Miles with a Dog Sled, _Hudson Stuck, D.D._

The Adventures of a Nature Guide, _Enos A. Mills_

The Arapaho Sun Dance, _G. A. Dorsey_

The Book of National Parks, _Robert Sterling Yard_

The Conquest of Mt. McKinley, _Belmore Browne_

The Cliff Dwellers of the Mesa Verde, _Nordenskiold_

The Desert, _John C. Van Dyke_

The Grand Canyon of The Colorado, _John C. Van Dyke_

The Ice Age in North America, _G. F. Wright_

The Land of Little Rain, _Mary Austin_

The Mountain That Was God, _John H. Williams_

The Mountains of Oregon, _W. G. Steel_

The Seven Wonders of the New World, _J. K. Peck_

The Snake Dance of the Moqui, _J. G. Bourke_

The Spell of the Yukon, _Robert W. Service_

The Winning of the Far West, _McElroy_

The Yellowstone National Park Historical and Descriptive, _Chittenden_

The Yosemite Valley, The Discovery of, _L. H. Bunnell_

Trees of California, _Jepson_

Trees of the Northern United States, _A. C. Apgar_

Two Great Canyons, _C. C. Cole_

Western Bird Guide, _Margaret Armstrong_

Western Wild Flowers, _Margaret Armstrong_

With Canoe and Saddle, _Theo. Winthrop_

Wonders of the Colorado Desert, _G. W. James_

Wonders of the Yellowstone, _J. Richardson_

Zuni Folk Tales, _Frank Harvey Cushing_




INDEX

    Absoroka Range, 53
    Acoma, Pueblo of, 183
    Alaska, 61
    Alcatras, 126
    Albuquerque, 175
    Apache Reservation, 185
    Apache Trail, 191
    Ashland, Ore., 67
    Appeal to Tourists, 194
    Astoria, 85

    Bandelier Nat. Mon., 186
    Banff, Alberta, 29
    Belton, 37
    Belvedere, 132
    Berkeley, 134
    Beverly Hills, 145
    Bitter Root Valley, 40
    Blackfeet Glacier, 37

    California State Redwood Park, 138
    Canadian Rockies, 29
    Carmel-by-the-Sea, 141
    Childs Glacier, 62
    Canyon of the Arkansas, 19
    Canyon Diablo, 177
    Capulin Mountain Nat. Mon., 186
    Carpentaria, 144
    Cascades, 87
    Casa Grande Nat. Mon., 194
    Cave of the Winds, Colo., 15
    Chelan, Lake, 80
    Cheyenne Mountain Road, 11
    Cliff Dwellings, 16
    Coast Range, 122
    Cochiti, Pueblo of, 181
    Coeur d’Alene, Lake, 41
    Colorado Desert, 156
    Colorado Nat. Mon., 14
    Colorado Springs, 10
    Columbia River, 84
    Columbia River Trip, 86
    Columbia River Highway, 88
    Coronado Beach, 153
    Crater Lake Nat. Park, 67
    Cripple Creek, 13

    Denver, 3
    Devil’s Half Acre, 99
    Devil’s Tower Nat. Mon., 39
    Diablo, Mount, 133
    Dinosaur Nat. Mon., 25
    Donner Lake, 105
    Durango, 5

    El Morro Nat. Mon., 189
    Estes Park, 5

    Feather River Canyon, 97
    Flathead Reservation, 41
    Fresno, 106

    Gallup, 187
    Garden of the Gods, 14
    Gen. Grant Nat. Park, 116
    Glacier, 32
    Glacier Nat. Park, 36
    Golden Gate, 124
    Golden Gate Park, 126
    Grand Canyon Nat. Park, 163
    Grand Coulee, 82
    Grand Teton, 54
    Gran Quivira Nat. Mon., 190

    Hamilton, Mount, 137
    Hetch Hetchy Valley, 112
    High Drive, Colo., 12
    Hood, Mount, 91
    Holbrook, 176
    Hopiland, 176
    Hot Springs Valley, 99

    Jackson Lake, 53
    John Muir Trail, 121

    Kearsarge Pass, 121
    Kern Valley, 122
    Kings River Canyon, 117
    Klamath Falls, 68

    Laggan, 30
    Laguna, Pueblo of, 183
    Lake Louise, 30
    Lassen Volcanic Nat. Park, 97
    Leland Stanford University, 135
    Lewis and Clark Cavern Nat. Mon., 42
    Lick Observatory, 137
    Lodi and the Calaveras Big Trees, 103
    Loma, Point, 154
    Los Angeles, 148
    Lowe, Mount, 150
    Lund, Utah, 24

    Manitou, 13
    Medford, Ore., 67
    Merced, 106
    Mesa Verde Nat. Park, 20
    Missions, The California, 158
    Missoula, 40
    Monterey, 138
    Montezuma Castle Nat. Mon., 193
    Mount McKinley, 64
    Mount Olympus Nat. Mon., 59
    Mount Manitou, 14
    Mount Moran, 54
    Mount Rainier Nat. Park, 73
    Mount Washburn, 45
    Mount Whitney, 115
    Muir Woods, Nat. Mon., 130
    Murphys, 104

    Natural Bridges Nat. Mon., 24
    Navajo Nat. Mon., 24
    Navajo Reservation, 179
    New Mexico, 174

    Oakland, 134
    Ocean Beach, 128
    Ogden, 18
    Oregon Caves Nat. Mon., 92

    Pacific Grove, 140
    Palo Alto, 135
    Panama Pacific Int. Expo., 128
    Painted Desert, 169
    Papago Saguaro Nat. Mon., 192
    Pasadena, 149
    Paso Robles Hot Springs, 141
    Pend d’Orielle Lake, 41
    Petrified Forest Nat. Mon., 170
    Pinnacles Nat. Mon., 139
    Phoenix, 190
    Pikes Peak, 10
    Portland, 89
    Presidio, 125
    Puget Sound, 59

    Rainbow Bridge Nat. Mon., 181
    Ravalli, 41
    Riverside, 151
    Rocky Mountain Nat. Park, 6
    Roosevelt Dam, 190
    Roosevelt Nat. Park, Proposed Site, 116

    Sacramento, 102
    Sacramento Valley, 122
    Salt Lake City, 17
    Salt Lake, 18
    Sahara, Great American, 154
    San Diego, 152
    San Francisco, 124
    San Francisco Bay, 125
    San Luis Obispo, 142
    San Mateo, 135
    San Pedro, 145
    San Joaquin Valley, 122
    San Jose, 136
    Santa Ana Valley, 152
    Santa Barbara, 144
    Santa Catalina, 146
    Santa Clara, 136
    Santa Clara Valley, 136
    Santa Cruz, 137
    Santa Fé, 175
    Santa Monica, 145
    Santa Rosa, 134
    Sausalito, 124
    Seattle, 72
    Sequoia Nat. Park, 113
    Shasta, Mount, 95
    Sicamous, 32
    Sierra Nevada Range, 122
    Sitka Nat. Mon., 65
    Shoshone Cavern Nat. Mon., 43
    Sonoma, 133
    Spokane, 42
    Suggestions for Mountain Climbing, 77

    Tacoma, 73
    Tamalpais, Mount, 129
    Tahoe, Lake, 100
    Tehipite Canyon, 118
    Teton Range, 53
    Tonto Nat. Mon., 191
    Trail of the Stoney Indian, 33
    Tucson, 192
    Tuolumne Canyon, 113

    University of California, 134

    Valley of the Ten Peaks, 31
    Ventura, 143
    Victoria Glacier, 30
    Visalia, 119

    Walnut Canyon Nat. Mon., 193
    Wawona and the Mariposa Big Trees, 111
    Whitney, Mount, 115
    Willamette River, 85
    Willapa Harbour, 85
    Williams, 164
    Wilson, Mount, 151
    Wolpi and Oraibi, 176

    Yellowstone Nat. Park, 43
    Yosemite Nat. Park, 106

    Zuni, 187
    Zion Nat. Park, 23




THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS

GARDEN CITY, N. Y.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SEEING THE WEST***


******* This file should be named 57190-0.txt or 57190-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/7/1/9/57190


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

